s immensely lucrative stakes in Shoprite and Steinhoff, the South African firm that is the second biggest furniture seller in Europe with brands including Harveys, Bensons for Beds and Cargo. He also owns a stake in Iceland.
But his first attempt to crack Britain – with Poundstretcher and Your More Store – was not a roaring success. Hasenfuss says: “He’s certainly not dull. Even when he cocks it up, he’s interesting. He’s a hell of a brave investor.”
The recent audacious acquisitions of Virgin Active and New Look suggest that Wiese has lost none of his appetite. Hasenfuss adds: “I believe the guy’s addicted to it. He loves the risk. His eyes light up. Like other people with golf or surfing or whatever, he loves being in the game.”
Yet he appears to have made surprisingly few enemies. “When I did a cover story on him I was looking for that quote, ‘Christo’s a bastard’, and really struggled to find anyone to say a bad word about him. He’s an incredibly polite, decent person. He doesn’t hold grudges. I’ve been around for a long time and I’ve never heard, ‘Jeez, Christo screwed me’. I suppose he’s rich enough that he doesn’t need to.”
Wiese bought the Lourensford Wine Estate in 1998, vowing to preserve and protect its heritage, and attends financial meetings there monthly. In 2006 he hired Koos Jordaan to run the wine division. Wiese is not a wine aficionado but is partial to the estate’s chardonnay and Méthode Cap Classique, according to Jordaan. Sometimes he also come to the property to enjoy clay pigeon shooting.
“Christo is very charismatic and easygoing,” Jordaan says. “Always a smile, always a joke. He’s the kind of guy who would walk in here and say to the staff, how are you doing? He’s down-to-earth, not on a pedestal. He doesn’t have a chauffeur, even though he could afford 10. He’ll always tell stories about the olden times – in every meeting there’s always a lesson.”
Jordaan adds: “What I’ve learned from Christo is that once he’s made a move, he’s like a very good chess player: there are a few steps after that and a very long-term goal. That’s why he’s been successful. He’s been able to identify these opportunities and make the right moves.”
South Africa is one of the most unequal societies in the world, polarised between a super-rich, still largely white, elite that includes Wiese, and a black majority plagued by rampant unemployment. “Christo feels business in South Africa has a common responsibility of really uplifting South Africa and Africa, either by offering job opportunities or in other ways,” Jordaan says. “He’s still very optimistic about the future of South Africa and Africa. He says the resources still need to be developed. That’s why he’s still here.”
He is married to Caro, the daughter of the late Japie Basson, the leading politician dubbed a chameleon because of his habit of changing parties, and has three children, all in their 30s.
Wiese himself keeps a low political profile. He watches rugby and cricket and spends time helping conservation efforts on his game farm in the Kalahari desert. “I still enjoy what I’m doing, which is building businesses,” he said recently. “I don’t play golf. I don’t have any particular passion apart from my business and my family, and that gives me all the pleasure that I want.”
Retirement, evidently, is unthinkable. Syd Vianello, a retail analyst, says: “In his world it’s about achieving the next business deal and that’s what gives him a kick. It’s a bit strange to go into the UK at this time of life, but it’s in his DNA.”
Britain has not always been a happy hunting ground for Wiese. In a strange incident in 2009, he was stopped with almost £700,000 in cash in a suitcase while boarding a plane at London City airport. But he has since had the money returned to him in full after his lawyers were able to demonstrate that the sum was a drop in the ocean of his personal fortune.
The amounts changing hands for Virgin Active and New Look appear to illustrate the point.
A weird thing happened to me at the London premiere of Andrew Morgan’s documentary The True Cost, last week. As co-executive producer with campaigner Livia Firth, I introduced the film to a very starry audience (including Tom Ford wearing aviators) and nestled into my seat.
But when my big face loomed into shot on the giant screen, I got the shock of my life. Despite having watched the film many, many times, I had somehow forgotten that I was actually in it.
Was I overawed by the occasion? Perhaps. But, more than that, I think I was suddenly aware that this was a film about fashion, and that didn’t compute. Ordinarily, I would never expect to be in a fashion film unless I’d accidentally strolled into the back of a shot.
You see, fashion films are not my natural arena. I might fleetingly enjoy watching one for a hit of fantasy, but I am very aware that – although they are almost always billed as documentaries – they do not ordinarily go there, as far as the reality of the industry is concerned.
Instead, from Dior and I to Valentino: The Last Emperor and Diana Vreeland: The Eye Has to Travel, they major in wide-eyed escapism, typically exploring the obsessional aesthete, and full of tropes such as voyeuristic, indecently long shots. This is the lens through which we’ve become accustomed to following tales of haute couture and general fabulousness.
The True Cost, on the other hand, is a fashion documentary that goes there and then some – it unravels the grim, gritty, global supply chain of fast fashion: a system that has injected the type of speed, disposability and price deflation that has directly led to the worst casualties in the industrial age. On our watch.
To be fair, the bulk of the reviews were extraordinarily appreciative of Morgan’s brilliant film. Harvey Weinstein announced at the first LA screening: “This movie’s going to shock the fashion world” – and it will. Reviewing The True cost, the New York Times said: “Under the gentle, humane investigations of its director, what emerges most strongly is a portrait of exploitation that ought to make us more nauseated than elated over those $20 jeans.”
But some of the reactions have suggested to me that – although it’s often proclaimed that fashion and film are trapped in a love affair (another trope) – unless the films are hagiographical, the two industries do not seem such easy bedfellows.
Some I have spoken to in the fashion industry found the impact of watching The True Cost overwhelming, and they reported experiencing a type of moral whiplash. Then there was that defensive whaddaya-want-me-to-do-about-it? reaction, coming from the fact that solving the problem has no straightforward answers, and Morgan purposefully does not present any. “I’m probably most proud that we avoided easy answers and instead chose to trust people to both feel and think deeply about the issues raised,” he says.
Morgan is actually much more charitable than me about the genre he’s ended up involved with. “I’m actually fascinated by those [fashion] films that follow one person,” he tells me from his home in LA. “The best that have been made recently tap into that fascination and give us a glimpse behind the curtain.”
But the director is also a fashion outsider. A father of four, Morgan was moved to investigate fashion’s dark heart when he glimpsed a newspaper photograph of two young boys – the same age as his sons – searching futilely for their mother after the Rana Plaza catastrophe, in April 2013. He was astonished to find out that his non-remarkable clothes could be a product of this fashion system.
Morgan says making The True Cost has changed his life – not least because of the terrifying moments when he and his producer, Michael Ross, were held at gun point and cornered by riot police in some of the 13 countries they travelled through to get the story. It has also made a difference to the pair because they have joined the dots between fashion, consumerism, capitalism and structural poverty and oppression, and will never shop in the same way again.
So, how should you handle a film such as The True Cost? Here, I actually think traditional fashion films have taught us something. We should watch as we’d watch those same reverent biographies: let the story absorb you, transport you and take you under. Engaging with the ugly side of fashion will lead to changing it.
The True Cost is available globally online, via truecostmovie.com, iTunes and Amazon, and in select theatres (at the Bloomsbury Curzon until 5 June).
Graduate fashion week (GFW) finished on Tuesday evening with a gala catwalk show crowning the recipient of this year’s gold award. Hannah Wallace, from Manchester School of Art, was named the winner for her edgy but wearable ski-influenced collection featuring oversized padded jackets and logoed sportswear. Her prize is £10,000. Previous winners of the GFW gold award include revered designers Matthew Williamson, CEO and creative director of Burberry Christopher Bailey, Stella McCartney and Giles Deacon.
The front row at east London’s Old Truman Brewery, where the event took place, included style blogger Bip Ling, and Suzy Menkes, international editor of Vogue. They watched as florals and boxy sportswear emerged as trends, with an influence from music culture ranging from reggae to hip-hop. Students from the University of Brighton to the University of Salford also showcased their collections.
Other award-winners included Melissa Villevieille from Edinburgh College of Art, who won the catwalk textile award and the womenswear award, and Ella Nisbett from Nottingham Trent, who won the Stuart Peters visionary knitwear award and the menswear award.
Judges included Julien MacDonald, a former gold award winner, and television presenter Gok Wan. Both were keen to praise the event as a showcase of new talent – and put it at the forefront of the industry. “GFW is one of the most important dates in the global fashion calendar,” said Wan. “Not only does it promote emerging talent, but it also acts as a source of inspiration for current leading fashion designers.” MacDonald echoed Wan’s sentiment, adding: “These are the designers of the future – the next Alexander McQueen.”
The hugely respected MA courses at Central Saint Martins and the Royal College of Art are likely to be the source the next intake of own-label designers on the London fashion week (LFW) catwalk. But events such as GFW allow the spotlight to fall on universities outside London, and move the focus away from the world of high fashion to the rest of the industry – where the majority of fashion graduates work.
Winner Wallace’s work has a notable edge, and other eccentric elements included animal heads from Maria Philippou, and Poppy Russell’s ode to northern soul, which came complete with dancers.
More commercial collections came in the form of Nisbett’s and pretty vine prints from Georgie Wood, of the University of Salford. This reflects the fact that many of the 1,000 graduates involved will be recruited to the design teams of high-street brands rather than setting up their own labels. Boohoo.com and River Island were both recruiting at the event.
Running across a long weekend, the 24th edition of GFW included 23 BA shows and had contributions from 40 UK universities. Unlike LFW, the event is open to the public, with show tickets available for between £11 and £35. The multi-focused event combined vocational advice with fashion entertainment, plus talks between industry figures such as V&A curator Claire Wilcox and model Erin O’Connor, live photoshoots, and the chance to see a 3D printer in action. Nearly 30,000 visitors came through the doors.
Fashion’s pledge to embrace diversity continues with news that IMG, the major model agency that counts Karlie Kloss and Gigi Hadid on its books, has signed a transgender woman to its international roster.
Hari Nef, 22, is often described as a model/actress/writer but last year walked her first womenswear shows. In spring this year, she opened New York fashion week on the VFiles catwalk wearing a “girl power” hoodie and walked for Hood By Air. While Nef is actually IMG’s second transgender signee, the first being Valentijn De Hingh, Nef is the only one signed globally (De Hingh is only represented by the Paris branch). “I can’t verbalise how thrilled I am to be joining the @imgmodels family,” Nef announced on her Instagram.
A graduate of Columbia NYU, Nef’s agency signing marks yet another interesting shift in the industry’s agenda. In the last 12 months, transgender model Andreja Pejic, 23, underwent sex reassignment surgery, while Lea T became the face (or rather hair) of Redken, marking stepping stone in changing attitudes towards diversity and gender.
Last month, Tess Munster became the first size-24 model to be signed to a mainstream agency, while Stefania Ferrario, the activist model who spearheaded the #droptheplus campaign, was signed to Models 1. Late last year, gay couple Jarlos became the first couple to front a campaign (DKNY).
Nef has never modelled in menswear (she says she is “a lot prettier as a girl”) and according to her IMG agents, is still “in the process of transitioning”. Streetwear label Hood By Air tends to lean towards diversity, but as Nef recently explained the fashion industry remains relatively slow on the diversity uptake. But with her signing, fashion’s relationship diversity looks set to change from tokenistic move and more towards the norm.
Two veteran rag trade brothers who came out of retirement to help turn around the fortunes of Marks & Spencer’s clothing business delivered as much as £72m to the bottom line last year.
Neal and Mark Lindsey, 65 and 62, were hardly mentioned when M&S’s chief executive, Marc Bolland, this week triumphantly unveiled the company’s first annual rise in profits in four years.
Recruited last year with the offer of a three-year contract – under which, according to industry gossips, they stand to earn millions of pounds a year – the brothers have been shaking up the way M&S buys and makes its clothing.
The two multimillionaire Londoners are described by fellow fashion industry insiders as charismatic hard men who know the international network of clothing suppliers from top to bottom. Now based in Hong Kong, although they retain homes in the UK, they’re friends with celebrity businessmen such as the Topshop boss Philip Green and Richard Caring, owner of a string of restaurants and private clubs including the Ivy, who also started out supplying clothing to the high street.
Unlike those two, however, who are frequently been photographed and have seen their business lives scrutinised, the Lindseys have stayed out of the limelight.
“They don’t fit the normal executive format. They have been successful because they are gamblers,” says one industry insider. “But they have always lived a colourful lifestyle. Both live life at 100 miles an hour.”
“They were party animals, two chippy guys from London,” says another industry veteran who knew the Lindseys in the 1980s.
The Lindseys are best known for helping M&S’s rival Next become more efficient in the way it buys clothing. Their efforts helped build Next into a far more profitable business than M&S, despite the latter ringing up more than twice the level of sales each year.
Those who know them say the Lindsays learned their trade working Saturdays and school holidays in their uncle’s menswear store in Golders Green in the 1960s.
Both then moved on to work for Rael Brook, a shirtmaker then in its heyday, and in the late 1960s they began importing from Hong Kong and India under the brand Southern Comfort.
In 1975 they started Nashville Fashionwear, a joint venture with Raybeck, a clothing manufacturer and retailer which at one point owned 300 stores including the Lord John and Berkertex chains.
The pair helped Raybeck move into menswear and built up a formidable range of contacts with overseas manufacturers. The business made own-label clothing for high street retailers including the Burton Group, which then owned Debenhams and Topshop, as well as their own Nashville brand.
They spied the potential business opportunity in making clothing where materials and labour were far cheaper than the UK, and in the mid-1970s the pair moved to Hong Kong to mastermind operations from there. 
“It was an exciting time in the industry and they were among the big boys, stars among it all,” says one industry source. “They were famous for their fantastic parties.”
Neal is tall and slim while his brother Mark is shorter and broader. “They’re known in the industry as the Mitchell brothers,” says one former colleague, referring to the characters from soap opera EastEnders.
In an 1989 interview with the trade journal Men’s Wear, Neal explained their relationship. “We have always worked together and I think the people that know us, whether they like us or not, will recognise that our relationship is the strength of our business. Because we’re brothers, there’s a lot we don’t have to say to each other because we both know what the other is thinking. And, of course, we both have total trust, which is a big help in a partnership.”
Having built a reputation with Nashville, the pair were approached by Richard Caring to help set up a sourcing operation for Next in “near east” countries including Turkey, Romania and Sri Lanka. Nashville merged into Caring’s ICD Group, and the Lindseys ran and co-owned the business, known as NV Production, with Neal living in Sri Lankaand Mark based in Romania.
In 2002 Caring and the Lindseys, who owned just under half of NV, sold out to Next and the Lindseys stayed on to work directly for the retailer. The business was merged with Next’s far east buying operation to become Next Near East in 2005 and the brothers ran the whole show until they retired in 2005. They were set to put their feet up before being approached by Marks & Spencer.
“They will make millions if they get the sourcing right. I don’t think they would have come out of retirement otherwise. They are already very wealthy guys,” says one friend.
They will be rewarded for every point of extra profit margin they can secure for M&S, and so far it is going well.
M&S’ gross profit on its clothing and homewares business rose by £24m last year as margin gains compensated for a 2.5% fall in sales. There was a 1.9 percentage point rise in gross margins on clothing and homewares, and M&S credited 1.8 percentage points of that gain to cutting better deals with suppliers – a figure analysts said was equivalent to about £72m.
One of the UK’s oldest clothing retailers, M&S has been struggling for years to make changes to the way it buys clothing in order to become more profitable. While Bolland has tried to emphasise that a team effort is behind the recent changes, industry experts insist the recent improvement is largely down to the Lindsey brothers.
“They know what they are doing and have enormous range of contacts. M&S has never got hold of its supply chain. They have too much history with big UK organisations with big UK overheads. M&S needed someone without that history or emotional attachment,” says one industry source who knows the Lindseys well.
Some long-term M&S partners, including Dewhirst and Courtaulds, are among a string of suppliers who have lost business or seen their profit margins squeezed as the Lindseys renegotiate terms. Israeli suit manufacturer Bagir Group was forced to issue a profits warning after M&S cut orders in May last year. The Lindseys have torn up relationships that have lasted decades and helped implement a new way of working in which more clothing is designed in-house.
Until recently, M&S had only a handful of its own designers, instead using “full service” suppliers who would present a range of different fashions for M&S buyers to choose from. Now there are 130 in-house design staff and another 30 freelancers. That is giving the retailer more control over the fashions it sells and more freedom to find the best deals with suppliers.
In 2013 M&S bought a fifth of its clothing directly from suppliers; now it is about 35%, and the company intends to increase that proportion to 60% by 2017.
Industry sources report that the Lindseys have introduced an auction system for some basic clothing lines, asking a number of different suppliers to offer their best price on each item. Some rivals suggest that the change of approach, moving away from long-established supplier relationships, carries the risk that M&S will lose the high ethical and sustainability standards that it has built its reputation on.
But an insider said M&S would not take big risks with that reputation, even if it did offer bigger profits. “Regardless of the agenda on margin, someone is going to make sure they don’t give [on ethical standards]. M&S’s reputation is massive, I’m not sure they would take that risk.”
The handbags will still be python, the cotton silky, the leather soft, the designs au courant and the prices steep. In an international marketplace for fashion and luxury lifestyle, citizen-shoppers would have it no other way.
But last week, the global fashion giant Kering Group, owner of brands such as Alexander McQueen, Saint Laurent, Gucci and Stella McCartney, published a groundbreaking report that seeks to grapple with an issue that hangs over the fashion industry: how to weave sustainability into a business that often appears predicated on whim and superficiality.
An exaggerated, three-year effort in brand greenwashing designed to win competitive advantage in an industry fraught with overproduction, supply-side challenges and weak consumer demand, or a sign of a billionaire owner’s genuine commitment to sustainability and care for the environment?
It’s always possible to do two things simultaneously, of course, but the publication of Kering’s Environment Profit & Loss account – EP&L – is nevertheless a bold first for the industry.
The Kering chairman and chief executive, François-Henri Pinault, said he recognised that as part of the textile industry – “one of the most polluting industries in the world”– his company and those like it needed to share knowledge to create more sustainable business models. “Sustainable business is smart business,” he told Women’s Wear Daily. The report will “help us ultimately become a more robust and resilient business”.
The company says it studied 578 processes involving 107 materials in 126 countries to understand the damage caused by its businesses, and those of its suppliers.
Kering valued its use of natural capital – “the stock of natural ecosystems on Earth including air, land, soil, biodiversity and geological resources” – at €773m in 2013.
Leading the list of environmentally damaging practices is the production of leather, linked to the destruction of forestry and use of heavy metals, and cotton, which is hugely demanding of water. Kering’s EP&L estimates that leather alone accounts for 25% of its environmental impact, while 17% is linked to cotton.
Overall, Kering announced, supply-side damage stands at 93% of the total. Only 7% of impact comes from its own operations in shops, offices or warehouses.
In a rare interview last year, Pinault rejected the inference that Kering was simply greenwashing in the pursuit of market-share, saying his goal was not “a question of consumption, but rather consuming differently … We will get to a time when consumption will be clean.”
High ideals, certainly, but with the fashion industry locked into accelerating and seemingly unjustifiable cycles of production, curbing its use of natural resources toward genuine sustainability can seem far-fetched. Still, Pinault has been looking to get ahead of the fashion industry on the issue.
“We don’t integrate sustainability to communicate to clients,” says Marie-Claire Daveu, chief sustainability officer and head of international institutional affairs at Kering. “We do it because we believe sustainability is inherent to quality.”
Efforts toward sustainability frequently flounder, in part because the costs are too great except at the high end. Reforming production, whether for the high or mass-market end of the industry, begins with a thorough review, says Daveu: “If you want to implement concrete action, you have to know exactly where you are. It depends on the product, but everyone in the textile sector is able to implement sustainable action.”
So how far has Kering come? Gucci boasts of bamboo handbags made of leather tanned in a way that uses less water and no heavy metals. The Italian house turns leather cuttings – more than 200 tons in 2013 – into fertiliser, and has developed its own python farm in south-east Asia.
Last year, Kering ordered 55 kilos of certified Fairmined gold from Peru, and Stella McCartney promotes use of wool from sheep farms on Patagonian grasslands. The firm recently joined the Swedish fast-fashion chain H&M to test a new recycling technology that separates and extracts polyester and cotton from used garments to create new textiles.
Kering executives say they hope the assessment will help the company to make better production decisions that will ultimately filter down to mass-market or fast-fashion brands. “The journey is not the same but you can still see where your impact is and where to implement best practices,” says Daveu.
Executives say there is no eco-conversion story for Pinault to relate but his convictions are plain and deep. “If we wait for governments to solve the environmental crisis, not much will happen,” he told Women’s Wear Daily last year. “It is up to us to show initiative, to be extremely proactive and to go beyond simple compliance rules.”
Though Kering does not break down its environmental consequences by brand, it estimates that it is 40% more efficient in terms of natural capital than competitors. Since rivals such as LVMH have not produced a similar report, there is little to judge it against.
For corporate leaders to get out ahead on social issues – aka “corporate responsibility initiatives” – is also good business practice given the volume, ubiquity and lack of differentiation in luxury goods.
Pinault and his wife, the actress Salma Hayek, are clearly looking to establish the company as a socially and environmentally conscientious luxury powerhouse.
Last year, Pinault joined the protest against the Brunei-owned Dorchester hotel in London over punishments for homosexuality in the sultanate. Last week at the Cannes film festival, Pinault sponsored a discussion on the uneven role of women in film, and Kering sued the Asian e-commerce giant Alibaba over sales of counterfeit goods.
A week earlier, the Pinault-owned auction house Christie’s broke records when it sold the Picasso masterpiece Les Femmes d’Alger for $180m, reportedly to the former Qatari prime minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani.
Christie’s overall take for the week – more than $1bn – and its generous use of guarantees offered to sellers drew speculation that Pinault was positioning it for sale. “You can view Christie’s as an interesting and amusing business to be involved in,” says one knowledgeable market watcher. “Or you’re grabbing market share at the expense of profits to ready it for sale – and sharpen up your business practice later.”
In both cases – Christie’s and Kering – Pinault is garnering headlines.
Climate change suggests that companies such as Kering need to get ahead of the issue or see their production falter in chasing scarce raw materials on a stressed planet. It’s not just a question of customers – or citizens, as Daveu prefers to think of them: the kind of employees Kering competes to hire are increasingly asking questions about sustainability.
Consumers may not want to be beaten over the head about sustainability when they are shopping for a handbag, but they want to know that it’s integral. “It’s important to show you can have beautiful, sexy, high-quality products that at the same time can take care of the planet,” Daveu says. “Every day it’s a challenge. It’s a long journey. We don’t always have the answers or know how to do it, but we have to try step by step to become more sustainable.”
When Angelica Cheung became the first editor of Vogue China 10 years ago, she learned the hard way what the elite fashion world thought of Beijing.
Photographers, designers and models turned down requests to do shoots in a country that is now probably the world’s biggest single market for luxury goods, but was then seen as a crass backwater.
“You thought being Vogue they would automatically want to work for you, and you realised no, because people didn’t know you, they were sceptical about China,” she said with a rueful smile.
“People thought China, to use a crude phrase, would be full of ‘new money’ peasants.”
Critics claimed the country had neither the money nor taste to make Vogue successful. But by the time her bumper first issue went to its third reprint, they had been silenced by Cheung’s vision of a magazine made to international standards just for Chinese tastes.
She did not just want to bring high fashion to China, but also to demand that the industry elite respect the needs of Chinese readers rather than peddling them hackneyed stereotypes of oriental mystique or transplanted western ideals.
Cheung has always been a strong advocate of Chinese photographers, designers and other creatives, but, particularly in the early years when the domestic fashion industry was still finding its feet, needed foreign talent on board to make a Vogue that matched international standards.
Coaxing famous names to come and work with her, then insisting their much-celebrated creative instincts were a bit off, was not a task for the faint-hearted.
“We started battling in a very nice way, you had to be careful not to scare them off ...[I was] changing their point of view about China in a very respectful way,” said Cheung, whose trademark asymmetrical bob has subversive echoes of US Vogue supremo Anna Wintour.
She challenged, as diplomatically as possible, everything from a preference for “cheongsam”-style traditional clothes that “our readers’ grandmothers would wear”, to a moody tone that was off-putting in a country just emerging from decades of deprivation.
“They wanted to dress the models in ‘exotic’ costumes, and then they wanted to shoot them in some ‘ancient’ location,” said Cheung. “They tend to go for the moody, dark, artistic, and sometimes I have to fight and say that is too European.”
“The Chinese will think, ‘Why do I want to be that beauty, it’s not even beautiful? Look at that woman, that woman looks sick, that woman looks downbeat, that woman looks like she is going to commit suicide soon. Why would I want to become that woman?’”
She also had to fight to put Chinese models at the heart of her magazine. “The difficulty was, to be honest, the photographers did not want to shoot Chinese models. That was 10 years ago,” adds Cheung.
“First they were not famous,” she explains. More disturbingly, some photographers struggled to celebrate Chinese beauty. “Creatively, professionally, they didn’t have a feel for them, they had never worked with them, they never shot Chinese models, so genuinely they did not have a feel for how to make them more beautiful.”
Cheung decided the best way to resolve this was by making China firmly mainstream. “We needed a Chinese supermodel,” she said, and set about creating one, pushing homegrown talent with simple deals: ‘If you want to shoot this international supermodel, you also have to do a shoot with Du Juan.’”
Du went on to become hugely famous in her own right, her star rising along with Vogue China’s. The magazine is now one of the biggest in the world, more than twice the size of its UK sister and so popular with advertisers and the country’s moneyed and aspirational classes that they have added 12 supplements a year to the monthly magazines.
“Everyone can see we are so successful, there is a big market and if you want a foot in China you have to work with us,” said Cheung, now preparing for a bumper 10th anniversary edition in September, which will go out to around 1.4 million readers in print and online.
She drew in her original audience by running the magazine almost like a fashion text book for its first few years. Articles about 60s fashion meant nothing to readers whose main point of reference for that decade and the next one was the Mao suit.
“We had to catch our readers up on the last 50 years of fashion,” she said. “What does ‘inspired by the 1980s, inspired by the 1940s mean ... who was Marie Antoinette? Even our own editors had to study, they didn’t know everything.”
She ditched the Vogue rulebook again after her daughter Hayley was born eight years ago and she started to think about the type of woman she wanted her to become.
“I painted a great picture of a stylish woman in the magazine, but that woman doesn’t have a soul,” Cheung says.
She brought in an “Attitudes” section, to showcase women’s work and character, and boost circulation among women who might not find time for a pure fashion fix every month. “Suddenly the magazine had a heart,” she says. “Vogue China readers are mostly working women, dressing is only a small part of their lives, so I have to capture the other parts.”
Cheung is as multifaceted as her target reader, as happy talking about her love for Arsenal as discussing her favourite Chinese designers and models. Before becoming a mother she would stay up until the small hours to watch British football matches in dingy Beijing sports bars, almost certainly the only person there who could analyse the success of both David and Victoria Beckham.
She won the battle for the heart of her magazine but is still fighting for the rest of the global fashion world to see her country as a source of inspiration, rather than just a giant storefront, and ditch the lingering cliche of Chinese as brand-hungry but otherwise indiscriminate shoppers.
The country’s sometimes strange and often mocked fashion trends of the 1990s and 2000s were born of the tumult of choice suddenly offered to people whose clothes had been as narrowly defined by the state as their job and marriage prospects, not any inherent lack of taste, she says.
“Not enough people come to understand contemporary China ... [for them] there is always somewhere else more important than the country that makes up 50% of their business,” she says.
“They create advertising campaigns that cost millions of dollars but antagonise and confuse the customers.”
Some of that patchy understanding was on display at this year’s Met Gala, sometimes dubbed fashion’s Oscars, where the theme of the evening and an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art was “China: Through the Looking Glass”.
Along with a string of Chinese celebrities and designers, there were also plenty of the old cliches on display when guests arrived in dresses that owed more to Japanese than Chinese tradition, or were apparently inspired only by vague western fantasies of “the Orient”.
But Cheung, who helped to organise the museum show and chronicled the glittering ball on Instagram, said the evening had been a rare chance to get people talking about Chinese fashion.
“If you complain every time people do something, [saying] ‘this is done wrong, we in China are not like that’, then nobody does anything,” she said. “At least they created more awareness about China. I try to look at the positive side of things. It’s better than nobody giving a damn about anything Chinese ... But is that the only image that I want people to see of China? No.”
In Metis’s previous piece, 3rd Ring Out, east London was underwater as a consequence of climate change and the audience had to decide what to do next. Would altruism win out over self- interest, or local claims over global needs? Yep, we failed to save the world. There’s likely to be a similar sense of helpless failure if you take part in this clever company’s latest theatre game, which looks at the effects of the fashion industry on those living far away, casting the audience as owners of a Chinese clothing factory.
Each table in the theatre represents a single factory, and after an introduction in which we find out a little about the UK’s declining manufacturing industry and the rise of the far east as a major player, each table is given a wad of (fake) money and a chance to make our fortune. Margaret Thatcher’s maxim that people want growth, not equality, rings in our ears. But when hearing about the lives of 21st-century Chinese factory workers, it’s hard not to think of Friedrich Engels’ appalled descriptions of the working classes in mid-19th-century industrial Manchester.
Beautifully facilitated by a cast of four, who act like croupiers, dealing each table a new card with a developing scenario and a binary choice, the show is like a speedily played boardgame. Yes, there’s a lack of nuance in the choices offered, and the breakneck speed at which the scenario unfolds doesn’t really allow for reasoned discussion. It sometimes all feels a little earnest and lacks a sense of drama. But it’s sociable, exhaustingly good fun and it would work particularly well with young people, as it clearly connects actions to consequences, and tots up the real cost of cheap clothes in the high street – both to people and the planet.
For the journalist used to the Gatwick Express and EasyJet, delivery into the lavish embrace of Prada is somewhat disconcerting. “I could get used to this,” you think, even as you worry that your shoes are all wrong, that your bag will fool no one, being neither new season nor vintage. At the 18th-century palazzo of the Fondazione Prada (its address is Ca’ Corner della Regina, though only rarely does anyone seem to use it) on the Grand Canal in Venice, no fewer than four black-suited young men are on hand to greet me: one to help me from water taxi to jetty, another to spirit away my luggage, and two merely to smile at me. “Please,” says a PR, leading me through the palazzo’s exquisite rooms (since 2011, these heavenly spaces have been used by the Fondazione Prada to display art). “Do go upstairs, where a buffet lunch will be served.” A buffet? Well, yes, the food is indeed arranged on a table. But when I approach a dish of gleaming asparagus – it’s so perfect, it might as well be by Manet – a waiter practically dives into my lap. If I’d like to sit down, he will bring me everything that I require.
It is the first week of the Venice Biennale. This lunch, doubtless one of dozens of similar gatherings around the city, is to celebrate the opening of Portable Classic, a new show at the palazzo which explores the miniature copies of classical sculptures that were such status symbols in later centuries. Needless to say, it’s a hot ticket. Who doesn’t want to be close to Miuccia Prada, an increasingly powerful figure in the art world?
Loitering, glass in hand, at one end of the room, I spot plenty of big names, Anish Kapoor and Carsten Höller among them – though it’s only when I clap eyes on Hans Ulrich Obrist, the itinerant and irredeemably well-connected curator and co-director of the Serpentine Gallery in London, that I know this is really the place to be. Obrist, of course, is already deep in conversation with our hostess, Mrs Prada – everyone calls her Mrs Prada, even those who have worked with her for decades – who slipped into the palazzo without fanfare a little earlier, and for a while I watch the two of them. While he is animated, arms windmilling wildly, Prada cuts an altogether quieter figure. Small and (unexpectedly) blond, she is wearing a white cotton dress with a pleated skirt. In her hand is a silk drawstring bag. In her ears are antique garnets or, more likely, rubies. On her feet are the kind of flat sandals, navy and white, that your granny wore at the seaside.
Two hours later, as the lunch is winding down and the diamonds and Chanel bags begin to exit the room, Prada approaches me and asks if I wouldn’t mind if we talked here, at one of the dining tables. It seems she has not yet had a chance to eat pudding and, sure enough, a waiter now puts in front of her a dish of panna cotta and roast peaches, an espresso (which she sends back, on the grounds that it is not hot enough) and some sugary biscuits. She eats quickly and greedily, and thanks to this, I warm to her – though it’s her face that really invites you in. Tanned as a nut, she wears no makeup, not even a slick of balm on her lips, while her expression is set somewhere between sombre and quizzical. It’s clear immediately that she couldn’t care less what I’m wearing; her eyes coolly meet mine, and never wander, not even to my (long-pondered and moderately daring) brooch. It’s as if she’s about to give me a tutorial.
In her home city of Milan, the Fondazione Prada has just opened a vast “campus” for art on the site of an old distillery close to a railway line. I saw it the day before, and gasped at its size, its ambition, its severe industrial minimalism (even the children’s play area is grey and white). At 19,000 square metres, its collection of exhibition spaces – one is several storeys high and called the Haunted House, another is a grotto deep underground – is twice the size of Renzo Piano’s new Whitney museum in New York, and at least three times as elegant. Designed by the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas, and filled mostly with work from the permanent collection of the Fondazione Prada, it has been received with some rapture by the critics, and with some gratitude by the Milanese, who will doubtless continue to make good use of its retro cafe – a 50s fantasy in green vinyl designed by the film director Wes Anderson – irrespective of whether they ultimately fall for the charms of Damien Hirst’s Lost Love (a gynaecologist’s chair in a large aquarium the artist made in 2000) or Nathalie Djurberg’s The Potato (a walk-in fibreglass tuber complete with purplish eyes that dates from 2008).
But is the woman who conceived it triumphant, over the moon, high on a combination of acclaim and relief? No, she is not. Only with the greatest reluctance, it seems, would Prada ever describe herself as pleased. “I’m always thinking about the next thing,” she says, her mouth turning down. “So I don’t enjoy anything.” But it’s so generous, her city of a gallery, with its square, its library, its cinema (visitors will be able to spend the day there for €10). She shrugs. “Well, I don’t feel generous. The result is maybe generous, but I didn’t start with that. I started with an idea, which was to do something that I think is important and relevant. I wanted to make culture attractive to the young [so that they would see] that it is necessary to your life. My intuition – and after many years, I realise that my main quality is intuition – was that it would be good to have a place where people could live with ideas.” Culture, she insists, must come to be perceived not as an extra, as a form of “decoration”, but as deeply useful. In what way useful? “It can answer political and even existential questions.”
She and her husband, Patrizio Bertelli, the chief executive of Prada, established the Fondazione Prada in 1993, and it was only after this, she says, that they began buying art. “We had to learn, and quickly. Until that moment, my cultural background was in literature, politics, cinema, theatre and dance. Art? I was never interested in it.” So who did they buy first? “Nino Franchina [the Italian sculptor and painter] was probably the first… ” She grimaces. “You know, you look and you study and you like it and you appreciate it and eventually you buy it. That’s not very noble, the buying part, but I have to confess it. I grew up with the idea that art is for everybody and not a matter of private ownership, but sometimes you want to have it.”
Happily, she finds she’s now less interested in buying than before: when I tell her, for instance, that the loveliest things I saw during my visit were the two boxes by the American artist Joseph Cornell displayed in a 15th-century marquetry studiolo-cum-sideboard, her reply is unsentimental. “I’d always liked Cornell, but I bought those because I wanted to have something to put into the studiolo,” she says.
Her resistance to – or embarrassment about – the concept of ownership extends to the word “collector”: she and Bertelli may own some 900 pieces of contemporary and modern art, but she flinches if you use the term in her presence. “I hate the idea of being a collector,” she says. “I really hate it. I’m not a collector.” Nor is she willing to be described as a patron, for all that she is well known for commissioning artists (no interview with Prada is complete without mention of the Carsten Höller slide by which she may, if she so chooses, depart her office at night). “As much as I don’t feel like a collector, I’m even less a patron. I am and want to be an active part of shaping culture, but I am patronising nothing. I hate all of that. I don’t want to be perceived like that, which is why we never sponsor exhibitions.” So what is she, then? “When I started becoming friends with the artists, there was a shift. It was like sharing personal problems.”
Crikey. Building galleries and commissioning work is some way to share personal problems, not least because, however she likes to describe it, it brings with it such responsibilities: she has it in her power not only to make or break a career, but to influence the market. Does this ever make her anxious? “I can’t speak about the market,” she says. “But it is a problem in every field: the hunger for the new. In fashion, everyone wants a genius, and in another few days, they want another. It’s really bad. The problem is that people think an artist has only one great period. But we all live longer now: an artist can have a comeback.”
Prada and Bertelli have always strived to keep their fashion business and their interest in art quite separate. I think this has to do with their fear of vulgarity. They would hate anyone to think the Fondazione Prada was simply another, albeit more esoteric, way of selling handbags. But even so, the two realms must influence each other. How could they not? She smiles. “Yes. I prefer that they don’t in principle. But of course they do. I’m very proud of my job [as a designer]. I used to be ashamed of it because I was educated, I was a feminist. But finally, I am proud of it. I earn my own money, which is a huge thing for a woman. The speed of fashion has taught me so much, and it’s a very open world by its nature. Movies, music: we need culture for our job. This speed is useful in the art world, and for sure the art world is useful in my job. It’s such an obvious collaboration, and deep down my life is one. Every man and woman wants to dress well. That’s how they express themselves.”
She can’t believe the snobbery that exists around fashion. “It’s an injustice,” she says. But isn’t it the case that some people also take it far too seriously? It’s only frocks, after all. For a moment, she is silent. Perhaps I’ve offended her. But then she breaks into laughter. “Actually, I don’t care,” she says. “I really don’t care at all!”
In Milan, I went on a pilgrimage – or at least a research trip – to the original Fratelli Prada store in the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II, which Miuccia’s grandfather, Mario, opened in 1913. Mario made travel goods for the Milanese elite: in 1918, his collection included a lizard bag with marcasite and a buckle of lapis lazuli. But the chief object of interest in his shop’s hallowed windows was not a trunk or even a bag, but a socking great pair of sunglasses made of wood and leather and bolted together with metal staples. Bulky and unwearable, I almost laughed out loud when I saw them. They were so hideous, and yet I longed for them, an unnerving kind of covetousness that Prada has been inducing in customers and window shoppers alike since the early 90s (she inherited the business in 1978, but did not begin making clothes until a decade later). As Giorgio Armani has occasionally complained, her designs are “sometimes ugly”. Nevertheless, in her hands, such “bad taste” is chic. According to Forbes, Prada’s annual sales currently stand at $4.65bn.
She took over at Prada reluctantly. Fashion, business: these weren’t her things at all.
Having earned a doctorate in political science from the University of Milan, in the mid-70s she studied mime at the city’s Piccolo Teatro under the legendary director Giorgio Strehler; she also joined the communist party, whose leaflets she is said to have distributed while wearing Yves Saint Laurent. Even now, she insists it was only thanks to Patrizio – the couple met at a trade fair; at the time, he also had a leather goods business – that she moved from bags into clothes (he told her that if she didn’t do it, he would have to bring in a professional to design a collection). “I really have no idea where it [her determination] comes from,” she says. “Someone once said to me: Miuccia, you are a monster of ambition. But it’s not that. My best quality is my instinct. When people ask: ‘Are you happy it turned out like this?’ I say: ‘Bah! I don’t know. I never had a goal.’ I act and I react. I have a special guide inside me.”
Does she ever doubt her instincts? “So far, I trust it.” Only once has she sent out a collection and thought: uh-oh. “It was many years ago, my third show. I invented vintage. Now, vintage is normal. But then, it wasn’t. WWD [Women’s Wear Daily, the industry bible] wrote that it was like the Flintstones meets the Jacksons, which to them was the biggest insult, but to me was the biggest compliment. Anyway, it was completely unsuccessful.”
Her success, like so many things about her, is paradoxical. “I was never classical enough for the classicists, and never avant-garde enough for the avant-garde. It was always uncomfortable, I always did something wrong.” But she pressed on, and in the end, it was this very wrongness – oh, those ridiculous wooden sunglasses – that came to be acclaimed.
Prada is 66, but she can’t ever see herself giving up fashion; not even the art world could lure her away. “My work keeps me grounded. It’s the place where I really know what people want. Of course, it’s more complicated now. Before, the world was small. Until the 80s, it was mainly white and western and Eurocentric. Now, you have to face the big picture. It’s globalised.” At the Fondazione Prada in Milan, there will soon be a dance programme, and its choreographer would like those who take part to perform naked. “And this is the Hebdo and Houellebecq problem. How can you insist on your own culture if you want to open up to the world? You have to start a kind of censorship. You must compromise. The political correctness of today – in the US, you can’t even show a nipple – I feel very deeply. People take offence so quickly. But if you believe in coexistence, you may have to give up something that’s yours. If you don’t, you may end up back in medieval times.”
I wonder if she feels things are going backwards in other ways. How does a 70s feminist like her feel about the pressure on women to look permanently young and taut? Wouldn’t she like to use her influence to do something about it?
“First of all, I had this problem – worrying about looking old – when I was 33 and thank God I got over it and it never came back. Second, we will arrive there. The world is ageing, so from a commercial point of view, eventually people will start saying: it [being older] is fantastic. You won’t convince people with [older] models, but when each of us really believes in ourselves, and feels good and beautiful and sexy and secure, that will be it. And in any case, if we work who cares? If you don’t work, of course you think about the problem of your wrinkles from morning until night! If you work, you have something better to think about. That is the beginning of every possible kind of pride, and with those women [who don’t work] I really have no conversation.”
Love and work… that’s all there is. Freud, she agrees, was right about this, and the two cannot really be separated. “If you don’t work, if you depend on a man for your bread, how can you be happy? If you are young and blond, maybe he will love an older one with black hair. So just live your life. This is so obvious. I think women can go on having lovers until they are 100.”
Why is it still so hard for women to be the boss? Partly, she believes, this has to do with the issue of children, and whose job it is to look after them (her sons are grown-up now, but she was “privileged” enough for childcare not to have been too much of a problem). But it also connects to something more elusive.
“Women are complex, but command is very simple. Maybe that’s it. Also, as a woman, sometimes you want to be weak. It’s almost a pleasure. It comes from your traditional past. We interiorise sweetness, delicacy, protection: all those qualities of women. Why can’t we say we are clever? There is something wrong.”
Will a jacket or a dress change your life? She laughs out loud at this idea. “I can tell you that it won’t,” she says.
All the same, it strikes me as rather odd – or perhaps I just mean unfair – that the woman, arty and bookish, Prada seems to have in mind when she designs is also the kind of person who, in reality, would be least likely to be able afford her clothes. What are her more impoverished fans (I’m not saying I’m among them, or not out loud) supposed to do? She thinks for a moment. “I don’t know what to say. It is undemocratic. If you can afford it, you can, and if you can’t, you can’t. I would say: wear vintage. I would say: be strong and proud. Look chic with something less expensive. When I struggle, I feel good because I am not passive.”
Life, she thinks, is about ideas not jackets – though this is easy for her to say. When she gets up to leave, I notice her sandals all over again, and though she is irrefutably wearing the shoes of a Scarborough landlady dressed for best, it’s finest Venetian terrazzo over which she scoots, not a flowery fitted carpet.
Serial Classic, Fondazione Prada, Milan, until 24 August, and Portable Classic is at the Fondazione Prada, Venice, until 13 September, fondazioneprada.org
A new book featuring images of Coco Chanel by the photographer Douglas Kirkland provides a unique insight into the woman who transformed fashion. Sent to Paris on assignment for Look magazine in 1962, Kirkland ended up living with Chanel for three weeks, and captured her as never before
All images from: Coco Chanel: Three Weeks/1962 by Douglas Kirkland, © 2008, published by Glitterati
When we heard that filmmaker Alison Chernick had made a biopic about Martin Margiela, launching at the Tribeca film festival and now online, we were excited. The cult designer has never been photographed in public, and never once taken a catwalk bow. No one outside his inner circle knows what he looks like, beyond one grainy and unverified picture on Google Images. Finally, we’d get to see the real Margiela!
Well, actually, we don’t. (The clue is in the title.) Although this documentary was made with the full support of Margiela, he never appears in it. (We do get one nugget: Jean Paul Gaultier, whom Margiela assisted earlier in his career, tells us that “Martin is very tall”.) So, how do you make a biopic about a man who has never appeared on camera?
You do it the Margiela way, that’s how. Margiela is about fashion and design in its purest form: no glamour, no image, no ego. In an industry where superstar designers are the norm, he insisted on working collaboratively with his teams. He made collections, which became the hot tickets of Paris fashion week, out of plastic carrier bags and wire coat hangers. He never booked celebrity models, and often covered his models’ faces in hoods.
The result is a 12-minute film which may not show us Margiela, but gives a real sense of the man. You get to see his awesome “collaborators”, the coolest talking-heads ever, who wear black and chain-smoke in the rain while talking about how Margiela subverted the media-circus of fashion and “forced you to look at the clothes”. You get to hear Suzy Menkes talking about the “Greta Garbo of fashion”, footage of his packed-out early fashion shows, and of make-up artists obscuring models’ faces backstage with black paint on decorator’s brushes. Apparently Chernick, who had found some early footage of Margiela with Jean Paul Gaultier, was disappointed when this was vetoed. But as fashion historian Olivier Saillard says in the film, Margiela “proved that you could make things out of nothing, and that’s a very comforting idea for the world”. An anonymous biopic: what could be more Margiela than that?
The Artist is Absent is the first documentary produced by Yoox Group, the internet shopping portal that in March announced its merger with Net a Porter.
A report released last week claimed that job interview outfits can seriously boost a candidate’s chances of success (in the study, the applicant who wore a Louis Vuitton logo on their top was deemed most employable). Here, nine people who hire and fire in fashion – and know their sartorial semantics – reveal their interview bugbears:
Generally, my advice would be to always mirror the interviewer as closely possible based on what you know about the culture of the business and people working there.
For the luxury and lifestyle clients we work with, a full suit is rarely appropriate. However, you need to turn down the informality a degree and create a balance based on the range of people you will meet in the interview (the HR manager may dress very differently to the marketing director).
The detail is crucial – neat, clean, interesting enough to build your personality around. Too bland is too bland and anything too obviously fashion or edgy will distract from what you’re saying. Absolute no-nos include sunglasses on the head during an interview, skyscraper heels if you can’t walk effortlessly in them, noisy jewellery and dirty shoes. The interviewer should be able to visually picture you doing the job you’re interviewing for.
In the communications industry, meticulous personal grooming is incredibly important. When a candidate is well-presented it shows an organised mind, as well as a thoughtfulness and awareness of what is appropriate. It’s not a suit-and-tie industry, so there are few hard-and-fast rules. I wouldn’t rule out someone because they were in sneakers, but they couldn’t be ancient dog-walking ones.
But I am not at all impressed by an obvious logo on an interviewee. A logo shouts louder than the person wearing it; I would rather they showed off their personality and skills. Once someone’s got the job, it’s different – I love seeing one of my team in an amazing piece they’ve hunted down because I want to know that my team are in touch and that fashion is important to them. But not in the interview.
When I was interviewing for my current PA, I was eventually deciding between two candidates, and I was leaning toward the one with the incredible Saint Laurent jacket and the fabulously groomed eyebrows. But my PA who was leaving told me to go with the other candidate instead, who would do the job better, and she was totally right. The moral of the story is: don’t get distracted by the eyebrows.
Nobody (boys or girls) can get away with short shorts in an interview and very noisy jewellery puts me off (very jangly bangles)!
I’m so scruffy myself that I like to think I’d rise above all that, but the truth is I’d probably find it pretty off-putting if someone was trying way too hard to be fashionable. A friend of mine once went for an interview on a fashion mag wearing a turban (bear with me, it was the late 80s). It wasn’t her at all, she was just wearing what she thought they’d like. Ten minutes in, the editor put up her hand and said: “I’m sorry, there’s no point continuing with this, I just know you won’t fit in here …” There’s a lesson in there somewhere.
What you wear to work matters. In any industry, but especially when you work in fashion. It doesn’t matter how much you earn, some of my favourite things have been bought in Oxfam. Especially the Notting Hill branch (tip).
What you wear to go out on a Friday night does not translate on a Wednesday morning. I once interviewed a girl whose blouse was open so low her breasts were on show for the world to see. I was so distracted I forgot my usual, relevant questions and instead asked: “Who is your favourite Spice Girl?” (actually quite important) and: “How many leopard-print items of clothing do you own?”
We all judge a book by its cover, and first impressions are so important. No one is taking a candidate seriously in a bad outfit. Not their colleagues and definitely not their boss.
In terms of image, I always prefer a candidate more formally than casually presented. Overstyling in hair or accessories – be it a big blowout or skyscraper heels – don’t impress and can give the wrong impression. Avoid logos completely and go for hair tied back and a crisp white shirt, and let your personality and skills do the talking.
The two things that stand out that have put me off hiring someone were chipped and very badly bitten nails and very orange, streaky fake tan. Overall, if someone is applying to work represent any brand, you would expect them to be well turned out and a reflection of your company values.
I would never judge a candidate by what they were wearing, it’s all about their skillset and personality. As a fashion person, you can never fail to notice someone’s handbag – it always catches your eye, as it would if they were on the tube – but it wouldn’t sway me.Fashion is an industry where individual style is celebrated, but perhaps in other types of job interviews I would advise dressing comfortably above all else. You won’t perform if you aren’t relaxed. And I’d advise mid-height heels that you can run up stairs in – more than anything, you don’t want to be late.
It matters less what individuals are wearing, more the thought they have put into it to make a good impression – and that they are at ease in what they have chosen to wear.
How do we talk about obesity when it is simultaneously a rocketing health crisis and the subject of documentaries about how fat women (it’s always women) can be fabulous too? As an average woman, I see the standard imagery of the fashion industry with its thin limbs and smooth skin as a silent daily reminder that I have not attained the arbitrary target. I don’t fit it, and it doesn’t fit me. So the current boom in plus-sized fashion should be cause for celebration. But there’s celebration and then there’s donning blinkers to all the downsides. The producers of Plus Sized Wars (Channel 4) focus on the UK’s biggest plus-sized brands, Evans and Yours and Australian newcomer Taking Shape, which was slammed last year for setting up a “skinny bird-watching” hide at London fashion week as a publicity stunt.
This documentary was originally called the rather more patronising Fat & Fabulous but someone in an upstairs office at Channel 4 clearly decided that the addition of conflict (no war was evident here at all) might spice up the ratings.
To the sound of All About That Bass by Megan Trainor (more thought could have gone into that decision), some plus-sized fashion bloggers try on dresses at an Evans event to launch their new, younger-skewed collection.
The “original fat shop” as the voiceover delightfully describes it, is desperate to plug into the social media word-of-mouth buzz created by these self-made heroines with a collective following of over half a million fans on Instagram.
“They’re tearing up the plump and lovely rule book,” smarms the voiceover, as it becomes obvious their posed selfies in cute outfits have far more influence than any billboard or bus advert ever could. No wonder they’re being courted and fought over by marketing mavens who suddenly see money where before they wouldn’t have seen them at all. The reaction of the producers here feels similar. Now these women are seen as legitimate documentary fodder, television seems almost desperate not to offend them. To the point where they use words like “plump and lovely”. Yeesh.
Next we meet the embodiment of the fashion industry in one woman, Anna Shillinglaw, the owner of Milk model agency which has a plus-sized list. And when she says plus-sized, she means 14 to 16, in proportion, no bulges with a flat stomach. Ground broken, box ticked. She teams up with the Sun newspaper to find Britain’s next top plus-sized model. We listen to her and the panel dismiss one girl’s picture after another for their perceived flaws. This one is “too short”. This one could have “po-tench?” queries her fellow judge over another. “Po-tench,” Shillinglaw agrees, putting the picture to one side.
And of the next, “I think her nose is a little bit wide for photography”. This with a straight face before dumping it on the failure pile. Even in a plus size world, your nose can be literally too fat for fashion.
Over at rival brand Yours, owner Andrew Killingsworth is thinking even bigger and plans to book US phenomenon Tess Holliday (AKA Tess Munster) for his company’s latest lingerie campaign. She is a size-24 bombshell with an astonishing face: one of those people your eyes involuntarily strain for like a cartoon coyote’s. It’s only weeks after Tess’s arrival in the UK, surrounded by media fuss, that Shillinglaw suddenly remembers she too has “always” been looking for a really big model to sign to her books and jumps on the bandwagon faster than you can say: “I want a piece of that.” Holliday naturally has more than half a million Instagram followers which, Shillinglaw admits, doubles any model’s price without further discussion.
In this slightly confused hour, the autonomy of the young bloggers at least emerges as a positive. They use their powers for good, even if those who would exploit that are quickly hoving into view.
The theme of obesity continued on the other side as the thoroughly enjoyable Back in Time for Dinner concluded on BBC Two. The Robshaw family ended their summer cooking and eating the food of every 20th- century decade, from post-war bread and dripping up to the microwave meals of the millennium, with a final visit from Giles Coren. He offered them a potential vision of the future as the human race searches for new and sustainable ways to feed itself. His conclusion? Insects. Even the agreeably game Robshaws balked at worm tartlets which food historian Polly Russell admitted had “a squeak to them”.
No wonder talks are on for a second series. It was a brilliant combination of nostalgia for the brown and orange decades of so many of our childhoods and bang-on casting. Whoever found this telegenic, likeable and articulate clan did half the work before shooting even began.
The clothing company Benetton has announced it is contributing $1.1m (£740,000) to a compensation fund for the victims of the Rana Plaza disaster, a week before the second anniversary of the Bangladeshi factory building collapse that killed more than 1,100 workers.
It makes the Italian firm the last major western fashion retailer that sourced clothing from the eight-floor building in Dhaka to donate to the fund backed by the UN’s International Labour Organisation. 
However, campaigners are bitterly disappointed that the total remains $8m short of an original $30m target. They had called for Benetton – which promised a donation several weeks ago – to make up the entire balance.
The company, which initially denied using any firms located in the factory complex, said it was donating double the amount advised by the accountants PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC).
The PwC report calculated the amount brands should contribute to the fund based on the $30m target and their share of production at the factory. Benetton’s share was 1.8%.
The figure was endorsed separately by Worldwide Responsible Accredited Production (WRAP), a US-based NGO specialising in social compliance through global supply chains.
Ineke Zeldenrust, a spokesman for the Clean Clothes Campaign, said: “Benetton had a real opportunity to emerge as a leader and prove that its pledges of empathy, understanding and care for the welfare of the victims were not just some PR spin. Unfortunately, the true colours of Benetton are now revealed.”
Zeldenrust questioned the WRAP report, saying: “WRAP is an industry sponsored social auditing and certification organisation with one of the worst track records in the industry. The Garib and Garib factory, for example, that went up in flames in Dhaka in 2010, was WRAP certified at the time.”
Benetton’s contribution comes after more than 1m people signed a petition on the campaigning site Avaaz calling for the Italian label to donate alongside other western brands linked to the world’s deadliest clothing industry accident.
Avaaz’s campaign director, Dalia Hashad, said: “Benetton is not giving nearly enough to ease the death and suffering their clothes have caused.” 
She said the payment set a precedent for other global brands that had not contributed to the fund, adding: “When workers die, you cannot walk away.”
Benetton said its total contribution was $1.6m as it had also helped the victims via its own support programme in partnership with BRAC, an NGO in Bangladesh. 
The company said it has also agreed to raise working conditions and living standards for workers in the garment industry across its global supply chain. Benetton said it would apply the principles of the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh to producers in other global markets.
Marco Airoldi, Benetton’s chief executive, said: “While there is no real redress for the tragic loss of life, we hope that this robust and clear mechanism for calculating compensation could be used more widely. For this reason, we decided to make the PwC report publicly available to all stakeholders.”
On the second anniversary of the disaster on 24 April, the Fashion Revolution campaign will encourage consumers in 68 different countries to ask questions about where their clothes are made. In the UK, it is backed by well-known figures such as the model Lily Cole and the ethical fashion supporter Livia Firth.
Mulberry, the luxury handbag maker, has said profits will be better than previously expected after a bounce back in sales.
The Somerset-based company’s sales rose 9% in the six months to 28 March, compared to a fall of 9% in the previous half-year, after it returned to its tradition of more affordable bags. Underlying sales, stripping out the effect of new store openings, rose 7% partly thanks to a 26% surge in turnover online.
“The encouraging retail trends over the last five months reflect our reinvigorated product offer and focus on our customers,” said chairman Godfrey Davis, who took the reins of the group a year ago. “I believe there is evidence of a turning point in our business.”
He said tight control of day-to-day costs would mean profits would be better than expected, after a profits warning in October. Strong retail sales have also offset a slump in wholesale orders which have fallen by about 30%. Davis said wholesale orders have now stopped declining.
Davis will now hand over to Thierry Andretta, the new chief executive, after he returned to an executive role in March last year. He stepped in after the abrupt exit of former chief executive Bruno Guillon whose attempt to take the brand into the super-luxury sphere led to a slump in profits.
Davis introduced the cheaper Tessie collection of bags and a lower-priced version of the brand’s popular Bayswater bag.
There is a fashion that fashion likes to ignore. Here is one of its imaginary clothes rails: a pair of crocheted white shorts, a fringed suedette jacket. Flick, flick. A maxi skirt slashed to the thigh, tops with backs or fronts cut out. Each item costs £20 or less and its main ingredient lies somewhere between 95% viscose and 100% polyester. Fashion’s wardens do not like to acknowledge these clothes, which live mostly in exile from Vogue and the highbrow style magazines. They shadow the wardrobes of celebrities rather than Parisian or London catwalks and the labels carry strange sounding names: Boohoo, Pretty Little Thing, Shelikes, Missguided. These are a new crop of digital fashion brands. Their shopfronts are Facebook, Instagram and Tumblr. They push out looks rather than innovate in design. Yet together they are at the forefront of a revolution in the digital fashion industry – a second wave of fast fashion.
The figures are impressive. Missguided’s turnover has gone from £8m three years ago to £55m for the past financial year. Boohoo’s sales were £50.8m for the four months to December. But these brands don’t come from where you think they do. Far from being faceless multinationals, all four are startups born in Manchester, in the streets still dominated by the architecture of the textile industry. Their founders are the descendents of immigrants who found work in Britain in the rag trade, and stayed in it. Now these entrepreneurs are using the decades-old skills and networks of the textile industry to map the desires of the digital consumer.
Missguided’s office, on an industrial estate on the edge of Salford, is full of empty chairs, soon to be occupied. Growth has been so fast that it employed 253 new people in the first half of last year. Bright and breezy clothes hang on rails – as worn by Nicole Scherzinger (who is a “brand ambassador” for the company, fronting the “Nicole X” range), Ellie Goulding, Fearne Cotton, Little Mix, Katy B and countless others. Walls are pasted with slogans. “Don’t make sense, make dollars.” “Wake up, kick ass, repeat.” Across the boardroom window, giant stickers spell the word L-O-V-E.
“I did the interiors. I’m a very peaceful person,” Nitin Passi says. Passi is Missguided’s 32-year-old founder and chief executive. He is striding through the studio, “the funnest place in the office”, where a model is posing in an outfit of skorts and top that costs £28 all in. “I like to say we’re the quickest,” he says. “If [the high street] are fast fashion, we’re rapid fashion.” “We update our site once a day with new stock,” Passi says, “but in my eyes we should be updating it every hour. If a trend comes, we need to have it on our site in under a week.”
There is a souvenir that Passi keeps, from his first week in business, which is key to this speed. “One of my buying lists. It says: pair of leggings, one size small, one size large.” He bought pieces only once he had an order. Despite its growth, Missguided has retained its agility. Five days after a dress has appeared on a C-list red-carpet event, a jersey remake can be waiting in an online basket. “And we’re going to get quicker,” Passi says. Felipe Caro, a professor at UCLA Anderson School of Management, has spent years studying Zara, which in 2005 was hailed by the Economist as the pioneer of fast fashion. He describes the work of Missguided and Boohoo as “fast fashion on steroids”. At Zara, the journey from drawing board to shop floor is typically around four weeks, Caro says. But Passi claims he “can turn samples around in a day”.
This sounds impressive. So why are these retailers locked out by the gatekeepers of fashion? Why do their clothes never feature in Vogue? “Fashion is a snobby world,” says fashion consultant Melanie Rickey. The only brand out of these four that has crossed her radar is Boohoo. Can she foresee a day when it makes it to the pages of Vogue? “No,” she says. “It is not a fashion brand. It is a cheap retailer of clothes for Saturday night. What would have been a street market.”
The comparison is accurate. The overlap between digital fashion and Manchester’s rag trade heritage is built into Boohoo’s head office, in an old cotton mill. Where Mahmud Kamani’s father bought up property, Kamani and his siblings bought domain names (they paid £10,000 for boohoo.com). Where Kamani’s father hauled his wares around the markets – he sold bags – Kamani and his co-founder Carol Kane have set up stall in the giant virtual marketplace of the internet.
Kamani is sitting at one end of a polished boardroom table, several mobiles before him, diamonds around the rim of his Rolex. Next to him, Kane wears a side plait and a Chanel necklace. They worked together on Pinstripe, a wholesaler owned by Kamani’s father that supplied the giants of the high street – “Topshop, your C&As, your Etams,” says Kane – and their patter has the ring of traders warming their hands on stories of sales past.
“We had lots of winners. Every season something would hit,” says Kane. “The fur gilet…”
“If you walked down the high street, every window had our fur gilets. It was in that much demand,” says Kamani.
“They would have taken whatever we had,” nods Kane.
They have entered a kind of reverie, the two of them, because they chalked up hits as middle men, linking manufacturers to retailers. Then, in 2006, Kane and Kamani realised they could use the internet to connect directly with their consumers. They found that one of the advantages of having your shop window online as opposed to on the street is that your stock has no physical context. No one can see who your neighbours are, or how high you pile it. If the website looks slick, so do the clothes.
“It is old rag trade reinvented, and that is in no way pejorative,” says Lorna Hall, head of market intelligence at fashion forecasting service WGSN. “It’s the second and third generation of the rag trade who have really grasped the digital, seen an opportunity and run with it. Why couldn’t they launch their own business with their products, brand it, give it a name, build it?” She points out that 23% of the prices at Boohoo are in the £5-£9.99 category, compared to only 11% of Asos products. “You start to see who that shopper is they’re targeting.”
“They want to try something in a small way and if it takes off, work out how to produce more of it fast,” Hall says. “Get in and out of stock quickly, really be able to put their bets where the money is. It’s the old short order, but it’s been digitalised.” So how are these companies managing to turn around clothes so quickly?
For a start, they are on the doorstep of a large wholesale district. A couple of miles north of Boohoo’s cotton mill lies Manchester’s Cheetham Hill suburb. Shop names flash past the car. Papaya Fashion, Babez, Fashion Zoo. “This area you could call the Silicon Valley of Fashion,” says Sam Puri, co-founder of young startup Shelikes, although it seems more like a fashion wilderness. He is making his daily pilgrimage to Stylewise, the wholesaler owned by his father, Sunny, which supplies Shelikes with most of its clothes.
It’s fun to imagine Little Mix, who have worn complimentary Shelikes clothes, in Stylewise, with its rails and vats of clothes, neon playsuits bristling with static, shopped mostly by older men. Sunny moved to Manchester 25 years ago from Punjab and, just like Kamani senior, started off working in street markets. “Sometimes, I think, how come we’re in this trade? Because we never sold clothes in India. We had a showroom for car accessories. But maybe this was easier to get in. You don’t need much capital. You can get credit from the factories. Some people we knew were in this trade.”
Where in the world do they go to, for clothes that need to be turned round really fast? “Leicester,” say the Puris. “Leicester,” say Kamani and Passi, who both estimate that over half the clothes they sell are made in the UK.
Terraces of 1930s homes line Leicester’s Chesterfield Road, erupting on one side of the street into an industrial estate. Chesterfield Road is Boohoo heartland. At Soft Touch factory, which supplies Boohoo and Shelikes, the back door is open to rows of whirring sewing machines. The same sound rises from Cat Girl on the opposite side of the road too, another Boohoo supplier. The place is clattering with industry.
“Your Boohoo, your Cash & Carry kind of place, it’s a fast turnaround,” says Eva Szplit, the pattern cutter, above the noise from the next room. “We can do that. That’s why we’re busy. It’s cut and made and out the door.”
There is lots of evidence in these parts of an upsurge in manufacturing. A short walk up Chesterfield Road is the Sharma Women’s Centre. Founded 30 years ago to empower local women, Sharma has taught hundreds to machine-sew, supplying local factories with fresh workers. “Our sewing machine mechanic used to be free all the time,” says Amarjit Parmar, the centre’s hosiery manager. “Now we have to keep chasing him.”
An enlivening of British manufacturing sounds like a good news story, and mostly it is. But last month the Ethical Trade Initiative (ETI) published research showing that 75-90% of workers in Leicester’s garment factories were paid £3 an hour. Parmar has heard of workers being paid below the minimum wage of £6.50. Another Leicester-based manufacturer, Bhav Mandalia, has “had ex-staff coming to see if we’ve got any jobs,” he says. One, “a very experienced worker”, told him he had been offered a job at £3 an hour.
Szplit, of Cat Girl, has heard of no such thing. “It certainly doesn’t happen here,” she says. There is no suggestion that any of Boohoo’s, Missguided’s or Shelikes’ manufacturers meet their retailers’ needs unethically. Cat Girl has just passed a Sedex ethical audit. In August Boohoo launched a supplier manual, and hired a corporate social responsibility manager. Missguided says it follows “both the ETI base code and principles of implementation in the engagement of suppliers”, though none of Missguided, Boohoo nor Shelikes are members of the ETI.
But as fast fashion accelerates, and shoppers require their needs to be met at the right price and on the right day, retailers need to work harder to ensure ethical compliance in their supply chains. Melanie Rickey believes that high fashion is no longer enamoured of fast, cheap chic. “Conscious consumers wouldn’t go down this road,” she says. But she thought that Boohoo would never feature in Vogue, and the April issue includes a bomber jacket, costing £30, from that very brand. It is Boohoo’s first appearance in the style bible. Has it broken into the high fashion world after all?
Fashion has an edgy reputation, but it’s pretty conservative about fabric. Cotton still makes up a third of fibre production. The non-organic variety (only 4% of cotton used in fashion is “sustainable”) has a heavy eco burden, using 11% of all pesticides produced. Plus, it takes 20,000 litres of water to produce just 1kg. But most of our closet space goes to synthetic garments, which are derived from oil.
The industry is huge, producing – by my reckoning – more than 80bn new garments a year. We often dump clothes before the first wash. And while initiatives like Greenpeace’s Detox Fashion try to clean up fashion, in pollution terms the fashion industry still comes second only to the oil and gas industry. That’s some rap sheet.
I’m all for wardrobe biodiversity. Look out for pieces fashioned from “green” fibres like salmon leather or rice husks (food-industry byproducts) – 700m tons of rice are harvested worldwide every year, and the husks are being processed into rubber for shoes (M&S uses it in a new Eco Trainer). Meanwhile spoiled milk can be turned into a super-fine fibre that weighs less than wool or silk, and Econyl, a “regenerated” fibre spun from discarded fishing nets, is a sustainable alternative to the oil-derived Nylon 6.
While pulp from cellulosic fibre can be turned into yarn as an alternative to cotton, be on the alert. Canopy (an NGO focused on forest research) reveals that 100m trees are logged each year to be turned into rich dissolving pulp for clothing, 30% from ancient and endangered forests. (Check Canopy for brands committed to sustainable sourcing.) Also, be careful about brands using “eco” bamboo. Check that it was planted on degraded land, not where forest has been converted to a plantation to make a quick fashion buck.
The giant fashion brands suggest that recycling can neutralise fast fashion and have set up schemes for dropping discards off in-store. If that’s true I’ll eat my corn husk hat (possibly edible in any case). In reality turning your discarded jumpsuit into someone else’s sun dress is a technical headache some way off being fixed. Plus, it would be easier if we stuck to the same old fibres – at the moment 70% of our clothes are a cotton and polyester blend. Recyclers don’t enjoy mixing it up – fish leathers and milk silk will complicate things.
If you’re not going to go down the recycling route, you need to commit to treating “greener” pieces sustainably – that means wearing them for the long term and not being addicted to the latest micro trend. So be honest about what sort of consumer you are, and cut your cloth accordingly.
Here’s another tip on giving your wardrobe a sustainable makeover: clean your clothes well. Fashion lover Ludovic Blanc was a self-described ‘heavy user’ of dry cleaners. But his threads came back covered in a toxic sheen and the harsh process seemed to shorten their life span. So with his partner Mathilde he opened his own ecological cleaners. Blanc: Naturally Cleaner, in central and west London, uses Electrolux technology and biodegradable detergents to clean, thus cutting out the petroleum-based solvent perc (perchlorethylene). Although used widely by UK dry cleaners, perc is a triple threat, persisting in soil, air and water. It’s banned in the US, France and Denmark. The award-winning Blanc also gets the thumbs-up from Woolmark. For information, go to blancclean.com
Coined by residents of Totnes, a Transition town. Stands for ‘something wonderful in my backyard’ and celebrates eco communities. It’s the diametric opposite of nimbyism.
If you have an ethical dilemma, email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk
In 1994, four of the world’s most famous supermodels were splashed across billboards under the slogan “We’d rather go naked than wear fur”. Fast-forward 21 years and it seems it is now another story for Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss, Elle Macpherson and Cindy Crawford, who have been pictured in fur coats, gilets and trimmed parkas.
They are not alone in falling off the anti-fur wagon. Figures from the International Fur Federation show that the industry is enjoying another year of considerable growth. The demand for mink, sable, fox and ferret has soared and farmers have stepped up production.
In 2013/14, 87.2m mink pelts were produced around the world, worth a total of £2.2bn, with 35m produced by China alone.
China also remains one of the biggest producers of fox pelt, and together with Finland was responsible for 91% of the 7.8m fox furs produced globally.
The figures – the first to show a breakdown of different pelts – follow on from research by the IFF last year which valued the global fur trade at more than £26bn.
On the British catwalks last year, more than 60% of shows featured fur, and at New York fashion week the figure topped 70%. While luxury labels such as Fendi have a long history of featuring real fur in their shows, fur is increasingly being used by newer brands as well. In New York, the up-and-coming label Cushnie Et Ochs said fur was its favourite material of the season, adding that it was “not ashamed”.
This month Karl Largerfeld said he would be putting on a special “couture fur” show to mark his 50th anniversary of working for Fendi. “For me, fur is Fendi and Fendi is fur, fun furs” he said. “Fendi is my Italian version of creativity. The Fendi haute fourrure fashion show is the opportunity to stage the royal furs of furs.”
He told the New York Times: “For me, as long as people eat meat and wear leather, I don’t get the message. It’s very easy to say no fur, no fur, no fur, but it’s an industry. Who will pay for all the unemployment of the people if you suppress the industry of the fur?”
In the 80s it was a serious fashion faux pas to step out in real fur, but today’s celebrities are rarely seen out of it. Rihanna and Rita Ora have recently been pictured in real mink coats, and Kim Kardashian dressed her one-year-old daughter North West in what was thought to be a $3,500 (£2,300) crystal fox fur coat at last month’s New York fashion week.
Lady Gaga made a Naomi Campbell-esque turnabout on the issue. Having initially denounced fur, she was later pictured in a full-length coat made of white pelt, and went on to say: “You see a carcass, I see a museum pièce de résistance.”
Mark Oaten, CEO of the International Fur Federation, said he was unsurprised by the growth in productionas the taboo around wearing real fur was fading into irrelevance. “We knew from the catwalks that fur is certainly being used much more by designers and from some of the retail figures, which can be patchy and difficult, that the sales are going strongly,” he said. “So with this increase in demand, farmers are deciding to invest more in fur farms and increase production.”
Oaten, a former Liberal Democrat MP, said Asia and Hong Kong remained the big players in the fur trade, both in terms of demand and production, but emphasised there was a shift towards buyers in America and Europe.
“Designers appear to be embracing it, customers appear to be embracing it and we certainly find the younger generation have less of an issue with fur than the younger generation of the 1980s,” he said.
“But it’s changed rapidly, even in the past three or four months. We’ve seen a change of patterns of the kind of consumers in Asia. Six months ago I would have said Beijing and Shanghai are really hot markets, but now we are seeing a shift away to the second- and third-tier cities in China as well. We’ve also seen an enormous increase in America because fur has had an incredibly busy runway and it has also been extraordinarily cold.”
In the UK, members of the British Fur Trade Association reported a 20% increase in sales last year. The association’s chief executive, Mike Moser, said the growth was being driven as much by younger generations as by foreign millionaires.
“It’s hot stuff because fur is being used in a real fun way in fashion now,” he said. “It’s more accessible for young people because of the increase of fur trims on coats and fur accessories.
“The BFTA runs an annual competition for design students using fur and this year we’ve seen a 50% increase in the number of students taking art. They just want to use fur in their designs which proves there such a strong interest in the younger generation.”
While the fur industry in countries such as Canada, the US and Europe remains heavily regulated, concerns remain over China, which is much more lax about the welfare of animals. Oaten conceded it was a concern for the IFF and said cleaning up the Chinese fur trade remained a priority.
“Obviously with so much mink coming from China, one of my big priorities is to make sure that they understand what the requirements are for welfare,” he said. “I was in China a couple weeks ago meeting with government officials. They have already adopted Council of Europe guidelines on welfare and we’ve had a long dialogue with them to implement even stronger welfare protocols. The difficulty does still lie in ensuring these regulations are always enforced in such a large country.”
Oaten said he was a personal fan of pelts. “I use a lot of fur for interiors,” he said. “Though I’ve not yet found a fur coat that suits me.”
I like to keep things tidy. I can’t work if things around me are messy, disorganised, and become chaotic. Even the things I pin to my boards are pinned properly, and in some order. I grew up in Belgrade, and apparently even when I was a little girl I was very tidy. I was born with it. I believe that all the elements of your personality eventually end up in your work. So my fashion designs have strong architectural elements, colour blocking and structure. It’s the same in the office. I am a perfectionist.
This is the place where I do most of my design work. We are on the top floor and there is a lovely terrace that wraps around it, with lots of light. The view is of the canal in Shoreditch. It’s an urban landscape – lots of rooftops and council blocks, and an incredible sky. The sky in London is amazing – fluorescent pink and orange and stormy grey. I spend most of my day inside and don’t have a chance to enjoy nature, so it’s nice to have that connection through the window.
On the board behind me you can see the inspiration for my AW15 collection. Also on the board are the artists I’m into right now .
I love to start the creative process by looking at art. I am drawn to artists who love the same thing as I do. I recently came across a young Canadian artist called Lara King who creates beautiful minimal sculptures out of torn and folded paper.
I find inspiration everywhere, and have a passion for colour. For one collection, I paired orange with yellow after seeing it on a crane on a building site. Building sites are inspiring because they’re full of bright primaries. I like plastic packaging and boxes and unrecycled things. My Instagram is full of it.
My office is mostly white, with pops of colour, which allows me to think about colour in my work. All the furniture blends in. I have a simple white desk and white chairs. When it comes to design, I always choose looks over comfort. I am happy to sit on an uncomfortable chair all day as long as it looks beautiful.
“This cape had a hook and she wanted a tie, and she wasn’t able to open it with her hands. That’s all there is to it. Madonna, as we all know, is very difficult.” So said Giorgio Armani, attempting to explain the singer’s recent Armani-clad tumble at the Brit Awards. Clearly, fastenings on clothes matter. But in recent seasons they have moved beyond their position as functional items – and occasional sources of wardrobe malfunctions – to become style statements in their own right.
The rise of the statement fastening began last autumn at Celine, where white and yellow buttons created diagonal patterns on black and grey coats, then popped up on buttoned-up jumpsuits, sculptural metal fastenings and visible poppers for spring. If buttons brought a warm, organic feeling to Celine – a fashion house best known for pared-back minimalism – at Louis Vuitton the fastenings were as racy as the Sticky Fingers album cover. Large exposed zips appeared on coats, dresses and skirts for autumn, with eye-catching exposed flies on trousers were spring’s key motif.
Two of London’s most influential designers, JW Anderson and Christopher Kane, also have long-standing fascinations with fastenings. Last season, Anderson’s buttons looked like tea strainers and flowers. Kane prefers chunky seatbelt buckles, which close his handbags and coats with a satisfying click. At the latest round of catwalk shows, for autumn 2015, Victoria Beckham showed oversized tortoiseshell buttons and buckle-loop belts. At Prada, there was an elegant rash of contrasting buttons, while Loewe presented diagonal zips and harness-like loops. Fastenings are brilliant for the high street, too, adding detail with minimal expense. Key pieces for the spring including Topshop’s baby blue cashmere jacket with back and silver exposed zip and Whistles’ caramel-coloured sarong skirt held together with a big black button.
There’s certainly something in the air, according to London College of Fashion creative director Tony Glenville: “The Musée des Arts Décoratifs has a button exhibition at the moment,” he says, “showing how designers from Chanel to Dior used buttons to create balance or diagonally emphasis the line on clothes.”
But really, he says, the current mood is all about designers moving on from the recent minimalist trend and mining the 1970s for inspiration: “Think of the zip dresses of Azzedine Alaïa; the frog fastening and braid used by Yves Saint Laurent in his ‘Russian’ collection, and the whole idea of trimmings and fastenings supporting a look. In the 1970s, design houses developed the idea that if a jacket has slightly more buttons or fastens slightly higher, the silhouette is immediately transformed.”
Of course, this is fashion, and all fastenings are not equal. A lascivious back zip, from the nape of the neck to the bottom of the hemline, is a bit of a no-no in style circles, recalling the ubiquitous high street copies of Roland Mouret’s spectacularly successful 2005 range. Aside from that – from duffle toggles to buckles inspired by climbing carabiners – fastenings are viewed as a neat way to bring a range of references to clothes.
“Unique fastenings certainly add to the beauty and intrigue of a specific piece,” says Natalie Kingham, buying director at designer boutique Matchesfashion.com. Like any ardent fashion fan, Kingham believes that much of an outfit’s desirability lies in the details – even if the wearer is the only one who knows they are there. “For next season, Erdem had some beautiful gold poppers inside his garments but it wasn’t something you’d see externally,” she says.
That said, with the ever-influential JW Anderson referencing the 1980s at his latest womenswear show at London Fashion Week, the 1970s influence could already be on the wane. There could be tricky days ahead for koumpounophobics, if fastenings go Dynasty: bigger, brasher and a lot less subtle. In any case, one thing is clear: it’s not just the clothes you wear but how you do them up that counts.
I read an article earlier this year in an American newspaper that said “a revolt” was beginning on the red carpet among female celebrities. Did this revolt happen?
Caroline, by email
Oh my God, Caroline, how could you have missed it? It was veritable bloodshed at the Oscars, I tell you – bloodshed! Julianne Moore decapitated E!’s Giuliana Rancic for asking “Who are you wearing?”; Reese Witherspoon stabbed Ryan Seacrest when he tried to put her hand in the mani-cam, and Patricia Arquette turned up in a burlap sack, flummoxing fashion editors who weren’t sure if she was making a statement or was this made-to-order Balenciaga? Behind all the carnage, the rest of the female celebrities marched down waving banners and chanting slogans: “No, no, we won’t go, the red carpet is a load of bull!”
I jest. Nothing of the sort happened. There has been talk for some time of an imminent red-carpet revolution, including, I’m proud to say, in this very column, which last year promised a full-on massacre of entertainment journalists. The New York Times, which always takes its editorial direction from this column, followed a year later (try to keep up, New York Times!), promising that “On the red carpet, a revolt builds over pageantry.”
And did this revolt happen? In all honesty, it did not. There were some half-hearted changes from the Oscars red-carpet coverage this year – E! ditched the mani-cam and there was a vague attempt on the part of some entertainment journalists to ask female celebrities about something other than their dresses. #askhermore, urged the social media hashtag (and you just knew there’d be a hashtag behind this, didn’t you? It’s a wonder how the suffragettes got off the ground without one). Unfortunately, no one remembered until it was too late that the only subjects most US actresses like to talk to journalists about, when not shilling clothes, are their amazing charitable contributions, how wonderful and amazing everyone they work with is and what an incredible calling the acting profession truly is. Great TV this does not make, and while watching women being commanded to flaunt their manicures wasn’t much fun either, I don’t think anyone watching the Oscars was convinced we’d arrived at a long-term solution.
It is, clearly, ridiculous that actors are expected to gussy themselves up like My Little Ponies to go to what is essentially an industry event, and that careers can be made and broken by the choosing of a dress. But that is the nature of the beast that has been built by the media, fashion designers and, yes, female celebrities working in cahoots, and not one of them is willing to break this bond. After all, celebrities have long since crossed over into being fashion models, as a glance at the covers of fashion magazines, which are now dominated by actors, not models, proves.
Reese Witherspoon was especially outspoken this year about the need for actresses to be asked about more than their clothes: “Let’s hear their stories!” she battlecried before the Oscars. As she finished battlecrying, she put down her megaphone and posed for a photo in her Oscars outfit, which she tweeted, detailing the source of everything she was wearing, from her dress to her jewels to something she referred to as her “glow”. The other female celebrities were similarly keen to give shout-outs to their designers. Perhaps those are their stories?
And just to prove that nothing’s really changed, E!’s indefatigable Rancic was so characteristically tenacious in her fashion criticism about the Oscars that one particular opinion verged on racist when she snarked that US actor Zendaya’s dreadlocks looked like they smelled of marijuana. Rancic later apologised, although in today’s social media climate I’m not sure if she felt bad about the racism or the failure to #askhermore.
No one looks to the Oscars for guidance about movies. If your innocence wasn’t destroyed when Crash won best film, then it must have been when Boyhood didn’t. For heaven’s sake, have you seen the people of the academy who vote for this? They make the Republican party look demographically diverse. No, the Oscars has become completely about the clothes, and this is because the media cover the event, female celebrities know they can get extra publicity by looking good and designers will take any free advertising they can get. The morning after, I turned on the TV in Los Angeles and, while reading analysis of the dresses in the New York Times, the LA Times and the British press, I was able to flick between – no exaggeration – five TV programmes debating the merits of the dresses. No one, it seemed, was too interested in the actors’ “stories”, but they were all fascinated by Julianne Moore’s gown: some of them liked it and – waddyaknow! – some of them didn’t, suggesting fashion analysis is not the objective scientific study it is sometimes portrayed as being.
I recently interviewed the wonderful Angela Lansbury. She recalled that, the first time she went to the Oscars, in 1945, there was no press on the red carpet. She wore a simple dress she’d bought, took her mother as her date and got on with her night. No matter how many social media hashtags are coined, the media still values female celebrities by their looks, and so do the vast majority of people who consume the media (not you. You’re far more intellectual). So, until the media stop covering the red carpet, it will always about the dress. And when will the media stop covering the red carpet, obsessing over actress’s looks and reducing them to show ponies? I can exclusively reveal that it will be at 10 past never.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com
There are still black leather dresses in the shops for infant Avengers. But they look a bit passé by now. This winter fashion-conscious children are wearing light-flowered wool, genuine or near-genuine Liberty prints. I have never actually met a child dressed quite so much like an adult. But they obviously exist.
They do not want flounces, these sophisticated children; they spurn tiny bows and wishy-washy colours; they have taken up denim and abandoned organdie. Children’s clothes suppliers may keep their soppy names - Gay Child, Small Wonder, Little People - but their merchandise has become comparatively brutal. The clothes in the new Small Wonder shop are bold and sensible; small dark smocks, subtly striped Finnish cotton shifts, stretch jeans. They make a few concessions to gentility; this is, after all, the heart of Chelsea. But basically, Small Wonder is anti-sentimental, on the way to the offhand adult shops farther down King’s Road: His Clothes, for instance, and Top Gear.
I think it has been pushed in that direction. First by Marks and Spencer, whose practical, bright, imaginative designs make pastels with frills look absurd. Secondly, more specifically, by Grade One, a small South Kensington shop opened two years ago by a young architect (and father). His business grew into a department in Woollands, and now a brand-new pine-fitted Swiss Cottage branch. Alistair Cowin’s clothes are tough, decorative, jolly. Absolutely classless, too; quite cheap.
He sat on the cutting table in his grey denim suit, a large-scale version of his child designs, which helped to explain why his clothes are beginning to go beyond Grade One. It is simple: grown-ups keep coming in and asking for children’s clothes. Twelve-year-old sizes are wide enough already: “We’ve only got to add three inches to the hem.”
All the clothes illustrated are available from Grade One, 8 New College Parade, Finchley Road, London NW3.
To date more than 50,000 tickets have been sold online by the V&A for Savage Beauty, the astonishingly immersive exhibition of the work of Alexander McQueen, and it doesn’t even open until 14 March. These pilgrims will follow in the footsteps of those who queued day and night across Central Park in New York to see the first edition of the show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. I hope that few of these fans, students, and interested people will spend any more of their money on two of the books released in time to leverage maximum gain from exploiting McQueen’s life and death. Not, at any rate, if they are looking for the keys to understanding the reasons that make him a force of lasting importance in British fashion culture.
The trouble with Andrew Wilson’s biography, Alexander McQueen: Blood Beneath the Skin, and Gods and Kings: The Rise and Fall of Alexander McQueen and John Galliano, by Dana Thomas, is that – for all their seemingly exhaustive research – they are insinuating, brutally non-empathetic works calculated to fire hatred for the individuals concerned, and for the fashion industry itself. Both are easy targets, especially when their stories involve the death of a young, talented person who cannot defend himself.
Full disclosure: I am a fashion critic who witnessed the careers of McQueen and Galliano from their early years onwards and deserve some glancing references in both books. My problem is not that I wish to be a whitewashing apologist for the behaviour of any one personality, nor for the workings of the mega-corporations that took them up. We know McQueen committed suicide, and that John Galliano publicly disgraced himself, was fired, and is now making his first steps to a comeback as the designer behind the Maison Martin Margiela label (Thomas’s book is timed to coincide with his recent debut). But what I would hope for in any biographical work is an intelligent distance, a long perspective that attempts to place events within their times.
Those perspectives deserve measured comparisons that neither of these books attempts to make. Going to the heart of the matter ought to involve consideration of what can happen to any star whose vaulting talent is taken up, celebrated and pressured at a young age. Is the world of fashion any more culpable on those measures than the music industry, Hollywood or sport? Addiction, nasty behaviour, burnout, self-destruction are par for the course in all areas.
Fashion underwent a massive transformation at precisely the time Galliano and McQueen were picked up by the French luxury conglomerate LVMH, McQueen as the creative director at Givenchy, and Galliano at Christian Dior. It was the post-millennium era, when globalisation happened and celebrity red-carpet culture was invented and the power of the internet exploded. For the first time, fashion designers found themselves in the spotlight, expected to be constantly performing stars. When they found that humanly impossible – when they retreated down their own self-destructive escape routes – apparently it was 50/50 their own fault.
There is a cultural backdrop to place them in, too. McQueen should properly be seen as part of the cohort of Britart and Britpop of the 90s – a fearless autodidact and impresario who drew on the mechanisms of theatre, film, dance and music in his sensational, visceral, 45-minute performance works. He followed Galliano into that British-made field; a place where the influence of London clubs, art history and story-making blossomed into live experiences. The medium was clothes, but they were operating at a psychological level far beyond fashion.
None of that can be gleaned from these books. Both read as blow-by-horrible-blow narratives pieced together from the accounts of those people who agreed to talk to the authors. Thomas is a journalist whose career has focused on analysing and documenting the ins and outs of corporate finance in fashion, and she makes a relentlessly unflattering, foredoomed job of it on that front. But to read her brass-tacks account, you’d get the impression that Galliano’s career has been fail after fail. She implicates the “gushing” fashion press in praising his work – we’re an easy bunch to disparage – yet she seems more or less blind to the meaning and emotion others may have felt at Galliano’s or McQueen’s shows.
Wilson, not a fashion insider, gained access to members of McQueen’s family. Thanks to him, McQueen’s childhood abuse at the hands of his violent brother-in-law, which the designer was careful never to spell out even to friends, is now exposed as common knowledge and a coda to his work.
The result is that the weaknesses and excesses of both men are unsparingly detailed, their homosexual relationships salaciously probed, raw wounds ripped open. Galliano is flayed as a flawed, fragile genius haplessly unprepared for the struggle to make it as a business person. His assistant, Steven Robinson – a talented, tirelessly devoted protector at Christian Dior – is portrayed as a monster. That was never the impression I got of the helpful, enthusiastic young man who proudly showed me every detail of the clothes after each Dior show. But Robinson died, unable to defend his reputation.
No quarter or credit is given to either designer for the fact that they both started as disadvantaged, working-class boys whose exceptional minds, technical finesse and sheer, bloody-minded ambition pushed the theatre of fashion far beyond the confines of mere commerce. It doesn’t worry me though. Galliano is getting a second chance to retrieve himself. McQueen doesn’t need to; posthumously, his reputation is only growing. An industry of books and movies may be growing up around him, as it would around a dead rock star. But he wasn’t a rock star. He did it through fashion, and everyone who really wants to understand what that meant need only line up to see it at the V&A.
Gods and Kings: The Rise and Fall of Alexander McQueen and John Galliano is published by Allen Lane (£25). To buy it for £20 click here
Alexander McQueen: Blood Beneath the Skin is published by Simon & Schuster (£25). To buy it for £20 click here
Kanye West is nothing if not tenacious when it comes to breaking into the fashion industry. His latest strategy? Telling Gap that he should be the company’s new creative director or – to use a recurring West metaphor – “I’d like to be the Steve Jobs of the Gap”.
“When I say Steve Jobs of the Gap,” he told Style.com, “as I talk to the people at the Gap right now, I’m not talking about a capsule. I’m talking about full Hedi Slimane creative control of the Gap is what I would like to do. And I can say this because it doesn’t conflict with my Adidas contract.”
This isn’t West’s first overture to Gap – in 2013 he approached them but “couldn’t get past the politics”. What is tantalising, this time, is that in theory it could actually happen. West has just launched a collection for Adidas, receiving a tentative critical thumbs up. The ailing Gap is currently short of a creative director, having cut ties with Rebekka Bay last month. Bay – the woman who successfully launched Cos – was hired two years previously to bring fashion nous to the US chain, but her nuanced approach did not work on a multinational scale. A West-helmed Gap, though, could be genius. Here’s why:
Judging by his collection for Adidas, West’s Gap would involve sportswear and hosiery. Specifically, an apocalyptic Flashdance vibe with Prada-influenced wrinkly knees on tights. There is not enough of this on the high street.
West would be unafraid to pay clear homage to fellow designers rather than resorting to the usual esoteric designer cliches. “You know my fucking influences,” he told Style.com: “You see Raf Simons right there, you see Helmut [Lang], you see [Martin] Margiela, you see Vanessa [Beecroft], you see Katharine Hamnett. It’s blatantly right there. I’m not going to try and act like I was influenced by a fucking dog walking down the street that broke its ankle that I had a heartfelt discussion with. I had a heartfelt discussion with all of these fucking Helmut Lang images that I stared at for so many years. I had a heartfelt discussion with my Tumblr.”
There are normal clothes and there is aspirational faux-normal fashion – a distinction West understands. He cannot abide mediocrity, saying: “I just feel like we’ve been hit with this barrage of extreme medium. And you never go and ask, “Hey, can I get an extreme medium?” Gap, on the other hand, was pilloried for its “dress normal” advertising campaign, which attempted to capitalise on the “normcore” trend for understated dressing in a series of adverts that made even Anjelica Huston look a bit boring. As in actually boring, not fashion boring. Got it?
In 2004’s Spaceship, West spoke of working at Gap. “Let’s go back, back to the Gap/Look at my check, wasn’t no scratch/So if I stole, wasn’t my fault/Yeah I stole, never got caught/They take me to the back and pat me/Askin’ me about some khakis/But let some black people walk in/I bet they show off their token blackie/Oh now they love Kanye, let’s put him all in the front of the store … So I quit, y’all welcome.” Clearly it didn’t go brilliantly, but West knows his subject.
Having courted the rarefied side of fashion – that critically panned Paris fashion week collection in 2011; his work with APC in 2013 – West’s current stance is to focus on the mainstream: “I’m only concerned with making beautiful products available to as many people as possible,” he told Style.com. “Everyone should have the good life … I hate the concept of limited edition completely. I hate the concept of separatism. Elitism. Classism. We’re all equal.” That last bit could be a Gap advertising tagline. All that and the ability to conjure up the most powerful of front rows (above), plus 11.3 million Twitter followers? Come on Gap. Make the call.
Would you wear clothing grown from a mixture of yeast, bacteria and a sugary green tea solution? How about from a combination of plant matter and microscopic mushrooms? These odd materials may sound like something out of the Jetsons’ wardrobe, but they could have an influence on how fashion is manufactured.
“I think the ability for us to grow our own clothing could have great positive potential,” says Erin Smith, artist in residence at Microsoft Research who brewed her own wedding dress. “Growing clothing from scratch could both eliminate carbon emissions caused by transportation and allow for a garment that can be grown to your precise dimensions and specifications.”
Smith produced her dress using a combination of tree mulch and mycelium – a type of naturally white fungus. The mycelium was bred in a tub of agricultural waste requiring very little added energy. Once the dress had been worn, it could be composted in the garden. She made the decision to grow her own dress because she didn’t want her wedding to be dictated by tradition and to have to wear something that would just sit in her wardrobe after the event.
“The concept behind a grown wedding dress was to take a one-time-use object and rethink its construction in order to have an appropriate material lifespan. The average cost of a wedding dress in the US is roughly $1,200 (£792) and can contain nearly 12 yards (11m) of fabric,” explains Smith, adding that making the fashion chain circular not only brings us closer to the environment but also reflects how needless our consumption habits are: “The wedding dress is a perfect example of a one-time-use, energy intensive and entirely non-sustainable model that is representative of so many of the choices that we make daily.”
Growing a garment from mycelium isn’t a novel concept. The most notable figure in the field of biomaterials is Suzanne Lee, founder of BioCouture, a design consultancy that works with brands to apply similar technology to sportswear and luxury fashion products. Lee has been experimenting with the idea of fermenting clothes for over a decade and has grown a type of vegetable leather from green tea, sugar, bacteria and yeast.
Back in 2004, a team at the University of Western Australia showcased a jacket from living tissue – mouse and human cells to be specific. And, a couple of years ago, Bioalloy, a research project based in the labs at the same university, produced a garment from alcohol using fibrous cellulose created by introducing bacteria into red wine.
Scientists and designers are increasingly looking at ways to blur the boundaries between biology and fashion. The technology is clearly there, but what about the demand? There is an acknowledgment that biomaterials are unlikely to replace cotton and leather, and that fast fashion will keep relying on oil-based polymers like polyester.
Lee has previously argued that biomaterials such as microbial cellulose would simply be “a smart and sustainable addition to our increasingly precious natural resources”. They do have environmental advantages, particularly in terms of water. For example, the team behind Scoby Tec’s biker jacket brewed from kombucha (a fermented drink made with tea, sugar, bacteria and yeast) claims that only 60 litres of water are required for one square metre of its leather. In comparison, it takes 20,000 litres to produce a single T-shirt and pair of jeans, according to WWF.
Despite the clear advantages, there are challenges that need addressing before bacteria-grown clothes can reach the racks. First, there’s an issue of scalability. The current processes used are arduous and time-consuming. It took Smith about a week to grow her dress. And, if you followed Lee’s DIY recipe, it would take two to four weeks to grow your material. The question for the fashion industry therefore is how it can deliver such garments on a commercial scale without cutting corners to save money. A possible scenario highlighted by Lee is one where industrial vats of sugar from streams of food waste provide the breeding ground for bacteria.
Second, there are doubts about whether people would happily wear something that has been fashioned from waste. A straw poll carried out suggests that some are uncomfortable with the idea. One respondent said it would be like putting dirty clothes back on after a bath. Others said that the thought of it made their skin crawl. Another said that we already wear silk (in his own words: “protein from a worm’s a***”), so we shouldn’t have any qualms about pulling bacteria-grown clothes off the racks.
Given the technology’s environmental benefits, including the fact that the materials can be biodegraded after use, would applying it to manufacture supposedly unnecessary high-end items be counterproductive if it could be scaled up and people could overcome their aversion? Smith suggests not, because people are always going to buy and throw away clothes regardless. Growing them is simply an eco-friendly alternative.
“It’s essential that consumers become more aware of the continued lifespan of their things once they’ve been thrown away,” she says. “Any object made from materials that will outlive its intended use is a part of our global waste problem.”
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
The morning I’m due to meet Chantelle Winnie, I’m at the doctor’s and mention I’m interviewing someone with the skin condition vitiligo. The doctor’s advice is to maintain eye contact throughout. Never let the eye wander towards her physical “abnormalities”. I had been prepared to ask Chantelle what she thought of this, but within a minute of watching her in full-on model mode, under a blinding skylight designed to unleash the black-and-white marble tones of her body, it becomes obvious there is no need. It would be rude not to stare at her skin.
Chantelle is, after all, a runway queen influenced by the walk of Naomi Campbell and the iconoclasm of Marilyn Monroe. She’s also a former contestant on US reality show America’s Next Top Model (ANTM), the new face of Desigual, and muse of famed photographer Nick Knight and London designer Ashish. Her skin condition has made her career and become a symbol for diversification and progression. As ANTM’s host Tyra Banks says: “The moment I laid eyes on Chantelle, I wanted her on Top Model. Her beauty is undeniable and her skin breaks down barriers of what is considered beautiful.” Yet it’s also an albatross. Marvel at the albatross all you want, but the more you remind Chantelle of its presence the further it vexes her.
“This skin here is a white block,” says the photo- grapher, pointing at Chantelle’s abdomen. “You can’t see the difference in colour.” The way her plaited skirt is resting above her hips only flaunts the off-white of her stomach. More flesh is required to demonstrate the variations.
Chantelle obliges. She rearranges the skirt, glances down at her dainty arm against her abs, flips her hand back/forth, white/black, matching/contrasting. She works the camera more than your average model. She pivots, she glides, she gracefully topples sideways to the bass of Major Lazer’s “Bubble Butt”.
“My skin’s not a normal sight,” she explains later, separating some hummus from a pumpernickle sarnie. “When a photographer says: ‘I don’t know what it is, but that’s just not it…’ I know. They like the different colours of my skin. They’re not getting them with a particular outfit.” Chantelle is wearing delicate whites which won’t distract from her skin, the main event. It comes alive as she stretches her torso, showing off its unique markings beautifully.
Chantelle has been compared to a cheetah, which she doesn’t mind. She’s a Leo. Cheetahs are sexy. She cares far less for “gorgeous cow” compliments. They remind her of being 13 and walking into the school auditorium where a bully led a chorus of “Moo! Moooooooooooo!” So unpleasant, but only marginally more so than the line in ANTM when a judge gasps: “Wow! You’re like an X-Man! But can you model?”
Chantelle is an inspirational conversationalist. She wants to blow up the fashion world by adorning the cover of Vogue and walking for Chanel. She has a boss-ass, businesslike handshake. Last November, she gave a TED Talk in which she concluded there’s no reason to fit into preordained moulds as “there is beauty in everything”. You want to believe she’ll have an illustrious career. Not only would that challenge a notoriously homogenous industry, it would also reward Chantelle’s modelling talents, which she has in spades. “If humans want to see the same types of people over and over that’s what industries will give us. If we want to see something different that’s what they’ll have to give us. People used to put me in a category with [albino models] Shaun Ross and Diandra Forrest. That is segregating. I don’t want to be put in a category.”
The thing Chantelle can’t pinpoint so astutely is that vitiligo only gets her so far before it becomes a hindrance. Take her Instagram, for instance. Without it, she would never have caught the attention of Tyra Banks. Her community of 400,000 fans are there to ogle over her most compelling asset. Whether she likes it or not, she’s a walking advertisement for outsiderdom first, and a model for stuff second. Her skin is more striking than any product she could sell. So every time I delve deeper into the subject of vitiligo, her answers become more opaque, her manner defensive. “I dropped out of school when I was 16, 17, I don’t recall.” Chantelle is 20. There are wounds there, a repressed anger.
Chantelle Brown Young was born to a single- mother hairdresser in Toronto. She tried her hand at everything: ballet, piano, journalism. Never modelling. She moved schools numerous times due to bullying and “altercations”. As her school attendance fell, modelling opportunities came to her. Her break arrived when local YouTube personality Shannon Boodram saw her Facebook pictures and asked to shoot her for a music video. For the first time she was celebrated for her looks. Requests to do editorial work came in despite her rejection from every agency in Toronto (she still isn’t represented today). When Tyra Banks called, Chantelle jacked in school for good and flew to LA faster than you can say: “Congratulations, you’re in the running towards becoming America’s Next Top Model.”
“People ask me: would you do it again? No. I want to be a model, not a reality star.” Chantelle was the second contestant eliminated. At the time she felt “stabbed in the back”.
Tyra Banks promotes diversity by blasting it into the homes of millions, but there’s also a crass exploitation there, which plays on a toxic cocktail of the contestants’ narcissism and vulnerability. Chantelle’s particular TV “freak-show” factor was her vitiligo. She developed the autoimmune disease when she was four. Vitiligo affects 1% of the population. It doesn’t discriminate against skin type or age and can attack any part of the body including eyes, hair and mouth, resulting in depigmentation patches.
Chantelle has made a conscious decision to celebrate her skin as it is. There are “treatments”: UVA light therapy, skin dye, make-up, topical medicines, even surgery. They don’t interest her. Some vitiligo victims have spoken of their frustrations with Chantelle. One woman expressed disappointment at Chantelle’s promotion of a brand of foundation, furious that she’d wear anything besides mascara and lipstick. “Hold up. I don’t care what you do, this is what I do,” counters Chantelle. “It’s my life. I’m very happy for whatever choice you want to make. Getting your eyebrows done, lip injections, a haircut, liposuction, that’s your choice. People think that because I’m so proud of my skin I stand for making no changes. I’m not for or against anything other than being happy.”
Chantelle prepares for a days’ work with a few hours’ sleep, some Netflix, water and cans of Red Bull – which are peppered around her dressing room. On set she keeps herself occupied by flicking through her Instagram. “There are some diehard fans – my army. Some are artists who draw me over and over and over again. I love it.” She’s also a music nerd, distracted by Kyle, her manager/DJ, who plays Rihanna throughout the afternoon while Chantelle mouths along. Her biggest inspiration outside fashion is the rap sensation Drake, who Instagrams a picture of himself hanging out with her several days after this interview. “The whole OVO team [Drake’s record label] is so iconic. There’s no other group of people who were friends for so long and have built an empire off those friendships.” Chantelle’s best friends are her mother, her two sisters and Kyle, her manager, who never leaves her side. Although Chantelle had never heard of Desigual or Ashish or Nick Knight when they contacted her, Kyle had. Her success less than a year after appearing on ANTM is unprecedented.
Ashish himself is unstinting in his praise: “Winnie’s unique look challenges perceptions of beauty in an industry obsessed with a kind of ‘perfection’ and a mainstream notion of what is beautiful or edgy,” he says. “Casting Winnie in the show made it so much more than just an issue about skin colour. It was about questioning stereotypes of models that we see on the runways, and about role models for young women.
Her lack of representation, however, is not an act of defiance. “I would love to be signed to an agency. I’ve brought myself very far, but with an agency backing me it would be easy sailing.” She doesn’t want to be seen as just a “spokesmodel” for vitiligo. “If one day I’m all black I’m still a model. If one day I’m all white I’m still a model. I am not my skin. I am a model with a skin condition.” Mistaken assumptions about Chantelle’s vitiligo still dog her. “I get comments saying that I’m a leper, I control how my skin changes, I bleach my skin, my skin’s burned. None of those are true. The world is looking at me now. I either let the haters affect me or I step my money up. When I stand back from all the hate and I check my bank account... Hahahahaha.”
Chantelle’s story is one of hope in a superficial industry – proof that our differences are cause for celebration on magazine covers – but it’s also one of frustration. Her biggest challenge is to get past what makes her different, to celebrate what makes her the same. Before we part, one final question: what’s your favourite feature? “My lips. I like my lips.”
There is no fool like a fool with children. Parenthood makes pinheads of us all. I considered myself perfectly sane until I became pregnant and found myself importing a specific model of buggy from New York on the basis that it was no longer manufactured in the UK, as though London was some sort of buggy desert and 943 different types didn’t already exist in John Lewis. I know parents with tutors for their five-year-olds and others who queued all night (or paid the nanny to) for their offspring to gain entry to a gymnastics course. When it comes to our children, nothing but the best will do. It isn’t exclusively a London thing. It isn’t just a late-motherhood thing. It’s everywhere spare money flows.
If children are the white-hot focus of our aspirations, it stands to reason that they won’t be dressed in Primark. The UK childrenswear market is worth £5.6bn, according to Euromonitor, with a retail value estimated to rise to £5.9bn by 2017. Social factors such as a rapidly increasing birth rate, parents having children later in life and a glut of baby-boomer grandparents with more disposable income at their fingertips than at any point in history have combined to make childrenswear a highly lucrative business. And nowhere more so than at the designer end of the spectrum.
Caramel Baby & Child (where a party dress can cost up to £250) has seen sales increase by 20% for the past three years, while luxury online retailers, such as Alex and Alexa (which sells more than 9,000 items by labels including Dior, Fendi, Burberry and Ralph Lauren), are thriving. Little wonder that Net-a-Porter has registered the domain name Petite-a-Porter or that Harrods recently expanded its childrenswear department to 66,000 sq ft.
Without question it is the internet, with its endless pap shots of celebrity offspring, which is fuelling demand for a designer childhood. Screwed up, perhaps, but since nobody is going to stop papping them any time soon, you can’t blame the fames for wanting to use the situation to their advantage. Celebrities latched on long ago to the idea of child as brand extension: cute kid + cool clothes + famous parents = good PR. Never mind how sweaty and uncomfortable one-year-old North West might be in her scaled-down Givenchy biker jacket and matching leather drainpipes: being tricked out as her mother’s mini-me ensures the flashbulbs keep popping, a state of affairs which is essential to the Kardashian brand.
Ditto Harper Beckham, who, while she has yet to clone Victoria by wearing a pencil skirt, will still prove a useful ally when the time comes for her mother to branch into childrenswear. Harper already has her own dedicated Voguepedia page, while on parenting websites eager mothers swap tips on how to recreate her nonchalant topknot. And it is hardly Prince George’s fault that parents (OK, mothers) all over the world are scrutinising his every style move. Everything he has worn – the Start-Rite shoes, the Cath Kidston tank top, the Petit Bateau dungarees and the Rachel Riley shorts – sold out within 48 hours, prompting Forbes to dub him “the world’s most influential toddler”. Does the world need a most influential toddler? Apparently so.
With North, Harper, Suri, Blue Ivy and Prince George foisted on us from every angle, it would be easy to imagine that an appetite for immaculately turned-out children didn’t exist before Google. Taking pride in your progeny’s appearance is as old as parenthood itself, though it was only after the Second World War that British parents began to aspire to anything more than “cleanliness” for their offspring, since the childrenswear market didn’t exist on a mass scale before then. In the 60s and 70s, brands such as Adams and Ladybird (both launched in the 30s) were as aspirational as Mini Boden is now, even if looking respectable was more of a concern for parents.
“It’s not a new phenomenon for women to want their kids to look well turned-out,” agrees Estelle Lee, editor in chief of parenting magazine Smallish. “But the fashion industry has adapted to make children a prime area for growth as our attitudes adapt and society becomes more child-centric. Whether it’s clothes, parties, after-school activities or education, it’s vital for parents to invest in their kids. Lives are busy, and there’s an expectation of return on investment with our children.”
Some might argue that the fashion industry was actually quite slow to adapt. In launching Baby Dior in 1967, the house of Dior was way ahead of the curve: it took until 1978 for Ralph Lauren to launch childrenswear, and even then he was something of a lone wolf. It was only in the 2000s that other fashion designers who showed their collections on the international catwalks decided to expand their reach, presumably reasoning that it was never too early to cultivate brand loyalty. Little Marc Jacobs launched in 2005; Stella McCartney Kids in 2010; Lanvin, Marni, Gucci and Fendi Kids all arrived in 2011, and Dolce & Gabbana brought up the rear in 2012. But the biggest player is Burberry, which reported £79m in revenue from childrenswear for the fiscal year 2013/14 – around 4% of the company’s total.
For London-based designer Roksanda Ilincic, a favourite of Samantha Cameron, the decision to launch Blossom in 2012 was less about building brand loyalty than answering her customers’ needs – and her own, since the birth of her daughter in 2011 changed her perspective. “I wanted to move into an area that fit with my and my friends’ lifestyle,” says Ilincic, whose prices start at £135 and who caters for two- to eight-year-olds. Creating an army of “mini-mes” was not her prime intention. “Blossom complements my ready-to-wear collection because it evolves from the same mood and inspiration. My sole aim is to design beautiful, well-made, comfortable clothing for all ages. It’s up to my customers how they fit that into their lifestyle.” And while some of the fancier “occasionwear” is dryclean only, Ilincic tries to keep things low maintenance. “Practicality is a major consideration – not least because I have the experience of motherhood. Simple, everyday items are easily handwashed.”
Not all designers are as sympathetic to the time-pressed mother’s cause – perhaps because their customers are only time-pressed in the sense that they need to fit in a mani, a yoga class and a juice cleanse before school pick-up. A Google search for “luxury childrenswear” quickly reveals a £400 pink sequin Dolce & Gabbana dress (specialist dryclean only), a £999 “spiral fur and cashmere cape” by Harrods and a Christian Dior party dress with “sophisticated layers of ravishing red silk organza, and gemstone embellishment. The price? £2,700. Butler not included.
While there is a market for this craziness, or else it wouldn’t exist, it is a niche one, largely comprising the cash-rich, time-rich wives of oligarchs and footballers, with the occasional Kardashian thrown in. “There are people who will splurge hundreds on frothy designer ‘pieces’ without batting an eyelid,” says Estelle Lee. “But most mothers are not idiots, no matter what their disposable incomes. That means spending as much as they can afford when the cost reflects sustainable manufacture, natural fabrics and good-quality cuts which will wear well and can be handed down. I’ve got two boys, so always try to buy ‘best’ quality. Ralph Lauren jackets – in the sale – will last years.”
Besides, if you really want your children to look cool, draping them in designer labels is not the way. There is a growing swell of style-conscious parent for whom trumpeting your wealth and status through an obvious label is anathema. It is far more imaginative – and tasteful – to pander to a certain aesthetic than a certain brand. The accidental poster woman for this movement is Courtney Adamo, the 33-year-old founder of online shopping portal Babyccino Kids. Her curation of an international mix of independent kids’ brands receives over 100,000 unique visitors a month. “It’s not that I have super-strong feelings against designer childrenswear, but I would prefer to support independent designers,” says Adamo. “While Babyccino Kids is style focused, we also believe in letting your kids climb trees and play freely. Most of the brands we work with are created by other mothers who pour so much love into their products, often making them by hand from natural and organic materials. I’d rather invest in products like this than shell out a bunch of money on a status symbol.”
As Adamo’s 85,000 Instagram followers will attest, there is a demand for quality childrenswear, most of which adheres to an aesthetic best described as “nostalgic”, though it could equally be labelled “north London”. Roughly translated, this means corduroy pinafores, pin-tuck blouses and ribbed tights for girls, and button-through shirts, suede desert boots and colourful shorts or trousers for boys. Fuchsia, diamanté and logos are verboten, be they Dolce, Disney, Gucci or Gap.
It’s a look which Estelle Lee sees as part of a backlash against the cult of the celebrity mini-me. “Designers like Elfie or Rachel Riley are paying homage to a childhood from yesteryear. Enid Blyton would be delighted with Caramel Baby & Child’s schoolgirl knitwear or La Coqueta’s Peter Pan collars. With increasingly complex lives, the middle classes are trying to fetishise the childhoods of their youth with mary janes, long socks and smocking.” This might explain why Prince George shifts so many products – his pantaloons might charm people as much as his pedigree.
Perhaps it’s not so much nostalgia as an attempt to halt time, to preserve our children’s childhood in an aspic of handstitched jumpers and T-bar shoes. In the UK in 2015 every child is royal, dressed just so and perched atop a throne concocted from its parents’ golden aspirations. “Here is the receptor of our dreams,” we cry in a manner that would make our ancestors weep for not having lived in an era when all anyone has to worry about is the provenance of their offspring’s PJs.
Chantelle Winnie’s army of fans includes artists, designers and photographers. For spring/summer 2015, she is wearing broderie Anglaise – one of this season’s key trends
Fashion editor: Jo Jones
Photographer: Mary Rozzi
Make-up: Adam Breuchaud for Tmg-la.com
Hair: Alfredo Llamas for Tmg-la.com using Bumble and Bumble
Photographed at Milk Studios, Los Angeles
Video: Hector Barriuso
Imagine the jumper you’re wearing now had skeletons in its closet. Imagine it was once a completely different piece of clothing in a previous life. That’s the idea behind eradicating waste in fashion.
Fashion is now affordable to millions of consumers, but the low-cost, high volume business model that allows this also encourages a culture of disposal, with an estimated 350,000 tonnes of clothing sent to landfill each year in the UK alone. 
With cotton prices fluctuating and agricultural land for food running out, the fashion industry is under increasing pressure to reduce its waste and become less dependent on virgin resources. Recycling textiles is one way of addressing both.
This isn’t something fashion brands have only just cottoned onto. Giorgio Armani launched its first eco project in 1995 with the development of a process to recycle denim. But in the 20 years since, interest has increased, with big brands like M&S, H&M and Patagonia running collection and recycling programmes for unwanted clothes.
Fashion brands alone, however, can’t drive waste out of the industry. While there is huge untapped potential in recycling textiles, technical challenges remain, in particular around separating the various fibres blended into one piece of clothing. To build the materials, technology and infrastructure that will enable a more sustainable fashion industry require industry wide collaboration.
On Wednesday 18 February, 1.30pm - 2.30pm GMT, experts in fashion and the circular economy will join us online to take your questions, including:
Carola Tembe, environmental sustainability coordinator working on closing the loop, product integrity and sustainable material, H&M.
Lucy Norris, anthropologist at University College London with an interest in waste and materials, reuse and recycling.
Lynn Wilson, textiles expert and manager of the Love your Clothes campaign in Scotland.
Annie McCourt, fashion and textile associate at the Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation Institute.
The live chat is completely text based and will take place on this page in the comments section below, kicking off on Wednesday 18 February at 1.30pm GMT. You can submit any questions in advance by using the form below, tweeting them to @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB or sending an email to hannah.gould@theguardian.com and we’ll put them to the panel on the day.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
Over the past few years we have seen a growing desire for more transparency in our clothing manufacturing processes. Just as consumers are becoming more informed about the pitfalls of mass-produced clothes, so more brands are emerging that cite ethical production as their purpose. This is great news for consumers who care about the people who make their clothes. But what do these brands bring to the table in terms of design credibility? Does a focus on ethics actually have staying power in a trend-driven market?
Fashion-conscious consumers today want to be able to make responsible choices, and now more than ever they can do so. With the whole world accessible in a single keystroke, we can vote with our fingertips. There’s an overwhelming desire for ethical fashion that doesn’t compromise on style; for shopping that can go hand-in-hand with making a statement of solidarity.
Making a statement with fashion is, of course, nothing new. We saw this in the ‘80s, when Katharine Hamnett turned environmental solidarity into a style choice with her signature slogan t-shirts. Vivienne Westwood built her brand on the theme of rebellion, and has now joined forces with the Ethical Fashion Initiative. Westwood hits the nail on the head with the slogan: “This is not charity, this is work.”
Now this marrying of social work and coveted fashion has turned into a style expression all of its own. Vivienne Westwood and brands such as Maiyet, Stella Jean, Edun, Raven & Lily, and a growing number of online ethically conscious emporiums such as Modavanti, Reve en Vert, Plumo, and Fashion Compassion, enable the consumer to make conscious choices without compromising on style. These brands and platforms offer added value through carefully curated and meaningful production sources, enabling the consumer to give back with their fashion choices – and pointing the way toward a new aesthetic.
Indeed, in a world where fashions from the past are perpetually rehashed into style mash-ups, it is the brands which let their suppliers inspire them that have the strongest edge. As a designer I like to start with the question: what if we let the social issue be a guiding light in our creative process?
Pants to Poverty, for example, has put humour into the serious business of mass-producing a humdrum item by addressing the “sweat shop” production issue. Through its business model, Pants to Poverty is supporting sustainable livelihoods, from organic cotton farming through to fair wages. Similarly, Made jewellery focuses on sustainability and positive change by empowering artisans and communities in Kenya. In Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Tonle Design employs women who sew innovative printed dresses using discarded jersey collected from the floors of garment factories.
Stella McCartney continues to come up with new material mixes and products while avoiding materials traditionally associated with luxury, like leather. Brands that upcycle, such as From Somewhere, Goodone and Christopher Raeburn, also have innovative signature looks because their starting point is to be resourceful with the waste created by the fashion industry. In doing so, they offer bespoke products, which is essentially what luxury is.
When I talk about my brand Emi & Eve’s Bullets to Beauty, I am often asked how I ended up recycling landmines and turning the metal into fashion accessories. By recycling bombshells found in the post-war landmine clean-up process in Cambodia, and combining it with weaving from a tsunami regeneration co-op in coastal Thailand, fashion can help artisans rebuild their lives. At the same time, it offers originality and innovation to customers. It demonstrates that a brand can enable the fashion-conscious consumer of today to help others live in freedom from fear. It’s this synergy that sparks the creative challenge in my inner artist.
These are just a few promising examples of the emerging harmony that is developing between design thinking and social-problem solving. This is not a trend. This is here to stay.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
On the terrace of a tiny café in the foothills of the mountains surrounding Palma, a clutch of Mallorcans sit, smoking morning fags and warming themselves in the mildest of winter suns. In front of them, a party of pasty Britons disgorges from a van and teeters in cleated cycling shoes over to where half a dozen bikes are racked.
The biggest, a tall man with shoulders the width of a bull and thighs like two uncut Serrano hams, is clearly the alpha male; a smiling silverback of a cyclist. As he fiddles with his saddle, one of the smokers notices the logo on his bike, and nudges his neighbour. “Hoy!” he remarks with a confused grin.
Hoy means “today” in Spanish. It is less a name, more a call to arms, a salutation, a whoop, an expression of delight, a war cry. Here is no complication, no snarling (Cavendish) nor sniping (Wiggins), just an unambiguous one-syllable statement of intent. Hoy!
But then again, throughout his long career, which yielded a record six Olympic gold medals, there was always something utterly irreducible about watching Sir Chris Hoy sprint. It was raw, pure, simple. From the pedal grind of the pistol start in those vast, unturnable gears to his brutal acceleration and steam-train momentum, the bike’s frame quivering under the strain and torque. What terrible strength. What poise and control. But mostly, what legs!
The big man, now 38, is nearly two years into hyperactive retirement. Today’s Mallorcan mission is the launch of a new range of clothing bearing his name. He is joined by his business partner Nick Hussey, the dapper founder of cycling’s latest blue-chip brand, Vulpine. Hussey, bearded and sporting a subtle mohican, is frequently described as a hipster. But in fact he lives in a semi-detached house in Motspur Park, suburban Surrey, with his young family.
“How hipster can that be?” he protests, before adding: “I’m 41!”
“Hmmm.” Hoy is not convinced. “Methinks the man doth protest too much.”
Hussey, who made his money in the music video business, is an interesting counterpoint to Hoy. He is a bubbling brook of sentiment, enthusiasm and, on occasion, silliness. A promising amateur rider in his youth, his wide-eyed delight at working with a genuine living legend is easy to spot.
They both, in their differing ways, have shared the same remarkable journey that the British cycling scene’s been on, from obscurity to something approaching the mainstream.
But now, mainly because of overachievers like Hoy, the secret’s out. Cycling’s moved out of the closet and into the high street, with a proliferation of independent and franchised retailers getting in on the act. So Hoy’s new departure makes sense in this brave new world. I get the impression he’s thoroughly enjoying his dabble in the world of cut and cloth. After all, it was Hoy who found Hussey, not vice versa.
“We approached half a dozen potential partners, but though I wouldn’t want to big up Nick too much, there was only one brand that we were aiming for. Because it was the same values for the brand that we have; it was about inclusivity, about people enjoying themselves.”
The idea is pleasingly simple. Vulpine has been making everyday clothing for cycling: jackets that work on a bike but look like normal jackets, jeans that feel comfortable while you’re riding but still function as jeans. It is stuff that makes cyclists less of a visible oddity on our streets. Hoy’s new range of “performance” clothing has the same attitude. The quality is there, but none of the exclusivity.
As Hussey says: “I hate that sneering thing with the clothing and all the different kit. Do what you like.” Hoy agrees. “I think cycling can take itself a bit too seriously sometimes.”
So here we are, all riding up a mountain in Hoy Vulpine shorts and shirts, socks and caps. My top is a gentlemanly greyish green, with a Tabasco-sauce dash of red along the line of the zip. My casquette (a posh cycling term for cap) is lemon yellow, with the same trademark Hoy track band stripes that adorn the bikes he launched in 2013.
By the time we reach the wooded summit of the Coll d’Honor, the January sun feels suddenly strong through the pine trees. Hoy, effortlessly, has reached the top first, with a mock victory salute. I trail in, gasping. While we all recover, he removes his leg warmers. “Sun’s out. Time for Scottish skin.” We find ourselves surreptitiously glancing down at those famous knighted quads. They are still as overstated as they ever were.
Retirement has not changed him. When I ask him to break down his post-racing work schedule into a pie chart, he quickly gets lost in all its subdivisions and fractions: charity work, sponsors’ commitments, motivational speaking, the bike brand, the clothing brand, and a fully committed attempt to qualify as a racing driver for Le Mans 24 Hours (a day or two after our ride, he finishes second in a prestigious race at Ascari race track in Spain).
Then there’s the life-changing matter of his baby son Callum, who was born to Hoy and his wife Sarra 11 weeks premature in October. His iPhone is jammed with pictures of the young Hoy, who is clearly thriving, although as his father strikingly remarks: “If you go by the date he was conceived, he’s really only a month old now.” No sprinter’s thighs just yet, then, but plenty of time to build them up.
All clothes by HOY Vulpine are available at vulpine.cc and evanscycles.com.
To see the full range, go to lookbook.vulpine.cc/hoyvulpine-ss15
As the great and good of the film industry prepare to honour their peers at the Bafta awards, the pressure to achieve preened photogenic perfection for the big night out is greater than ever. And that’s not just for the leading ladies of the year’s cinematic blockbusters.
Across the country, women are agonising over wardrobe choices as they get ready for dates, dinners and drinks with the girls, pulling out all the sartorial stops in a bid to emulate the starlets who walk the red carpet during awards season. Where once a trusty little black dress might have been deemed adequate for a night on the town, a desire for ever more glamorous and accessible “occasionwear” is fuelling a boom for mass-market fashion brands.
Last week, online retailer Asos invited fashion editors to the unveiling of a new collection created for an “occasionwear hub”, due to launch on its website in mid-March. A selection of around 50 key pieces from the collection included embellished “crystal mesh” mini dresses, laser-cut prom dresses, floral floor-length gowns and evening jumpsuits designed for a new generation of glamour girls brought up on a daily diet of red-carpet images, celebrity selfies and American prom queens.
“A decade or more ago, the prom didn’t exist in Britain, but now schoolgirls here will save up for a pair of Manolos or Louboutins for their first big night out and want the statement dress to go with them,” says fashion historian Bronwyn Cosgrave. “Until recently you had to go to designer labels for something fabulous that was youthful and fun, because the high street didn’t cater well for that kind of evening or special occasion glamour. Now the more accessible mass-market retailers are buying into that heavily, to meet growing demand.”
With international retail sales of more than £950m last year, Asos has declared an annual sales target of £2.5bn by 2020, and is planning aggressive expansion of its ranges in a bid to meet this figure. It is pinning its hopes on the new occasionwear collection being a hit with style-savvy, budget-conscious customers.
“They admire the style of actresses like Dakota Johnson or Jennifer Lawrence, who do pretty and glam really well, in a fresh, youthful, vibrant way that our customers relate to,” says Asos head of design Leandra O’Sullivan. “This season, sales of floor-length gowns in our Salon collection were up 95% on last year, and in January embellished styles were up 51% on even their pre-Christmas peak, so we know we’re on the right track.
“We know young women love to dress up for a night on the town, a wedding, a day at the races or a work function, so we have really focused on creating accessible pieces with that ‘special occasion’ touch. Prices start at £65 and the most expensive pieces – beaded, embroidered styles in the red-carpet range – cost around £185.”
But Asos does not have the market for affordable high-octane glamour to itself. Another online boutique, Little Mistress, was founded recently to cater specifically for young women inspired by reality TV shows such as The Only Way is Essex and Made In Chelsea. It has been a runaway success.
“They sell perfect prom dresses and glitzy cocktail numbers to young women who want to ramp up the glamour,” says fashion consultant Erica Davies, a 38-year-old who buys her own occasionwear from Asos. “H&M’s limited edition Conscious collection has also quietly been making waves at fashion events and was worn on the Bafta red carpet three years ago by Hollywood A-lister Michelle Williams.”
The chattering classes’ favourite, Boden, has also expanded its portfolio of school-run staples to include some sell-out occasionwear styles, priced at a premium over its core collection. Over the festive season, it introduced floor-length, colour-blocked silk evening skirts at around £200, and its spring collection features gamine floral separates that are sure to prove popular at home counties weddings this summer.
There seems to be a direct correlation between this inclination to dress up and the more casual mood that has dominated workplace wardrobes and catwalk fashion for the past few years. Retailers are reporting soaring sales in the “loungewear” sector, with women clamouring for off-duty soft jersey harem pants and cashmere onesies, and the softening of office dress codes seems to be stimulating a desire to go for maximum impact when the opportunity arises.
And it’s not just younger fashionistas who are opting for sequins and satin; more mature shoppers are seeking a sophisticated take on occasionwear at labels such as Coast, where marketing manager Emma McKeever reports “remarkable growth in online sales over the past 12 months”.
In recent seasons, stylists on glossy magazines have fought over samples of Coast’s signature long, full evening skirt in a range of taffetas, jacquards and printed satins, and this gained the brand a profile in influential photo shoots and a platform for sales.
“The press, and customers, have fallen in love with those skirts, which we rework regularly in different fabrics,” says Coast’s creative director, Neil Hendy. “The re-emergence of the skirt as a high-fashion item gives women a foundation for her own look, teaming it with a sequin sweater, a leather jacket, a white shirt or a silk blouse. The look can be adapted for any age, from 16 to 60 and beyond, and for a range of occasions. It’s up to you how dressy you want to be, according to how you style it with accessories. We are focusing on separates as the way for women to make the occasionwear trend their own, in the way they put it together.”
Amid all the speculation over who will take home the Bafta for leading actress, the fashion world waits with bated breath to discover who will wear what on the red carpet tonight. The accolade of a place on the best-dressed lists is coveted by starlets, whose earning power and Hollywood bankability can be significantly increased by judicious wardrobe choices.
When Lupita Nyong’o won an Academy Award for her role in 12 Years A Slave last year, her acting credentials were sealed. But it was her wardrobe of pared-down, contemporary red-carpet attire that won her glossy magazine covers and lucrative advertising contracts, with Miu Miu and Lancôme.
Jennifer Lawrence famously tripped in her fairytale Dior gown at the 2013 Oscars, but the Paris fashion house turned the incident to her advantage, wooing the young actress to star in their ad campaigns.
With some high-profile British talent nominated for key awards tonight, London style watchers are hoping to see some homegrown designs on the red carpet. So far in this awards season, Felicity Jones has been wearing Dior, and Keira Knightley tends to favour Valentino and Chanel. So it could be down to Rosamund Pike to champion British-based designers such as Roksanda Ilincic, Thomas Tait, Emilia Wickstead, Mary Katrantzou or Jenny Packham.
Designer Josh Goot has announced his eponymous fashion label has been placed into voluntary administration, saying the move was necessary to save his 10-year-old business.
“The retail market has witnessed a prolonged downturn since the GFC in 2008 and we are proud that we have been able to sustain and grow the business throughout the challenging period, while manufacturing exclusively in Australia,” he told the Australian.
“We now need to take some time to restructure to protect the long-term interests of the brand and all involved.”
The fashion label is the latest casualty in a brutal Australian market. Other recent closures include Alannah Hill, Lisa Ho, Collette Dinnegan, Marnie Skillings and Kirrilly Johnson.
Insiders cite the influx of international high street brands and online fashion retailers, the crowded domestic market and the value of the Australian dollar as ongoing pressure for homegrown fashion brands.
Goot described the market as “challenging”. “We are (as a brand), I think, unique in the Australian landscape and that doesn’t necessarily make our experience easier, but I also think that it does give us a real future and that’s what we’re going to be working to secure.”
The label is currently stocked in standalone stores in Sydney and Melbourne and in department store David Jones. It also reportedly has 20 international stockists. Despite the label’s financial worries, the autumn/winter collection will land in stores in March, and production is reportedly under way for the spring/summer collection. Goot says he hoped the move would strengthen the label. “We’re confident that we can emerge from the voluntary administration as a better business.”
Known for his clean sculptural aesthetic, Goot has long been touted as one of Australian fashion’s hottest talents. His 2005 debut collection was awarded the Tiffany & Co young designer of the year award, and the Sydney-based designer has shown in London and New York.
The label enjoys a strong celebrity following with Cate Blanchett, Solange Knowles and Kim Kardashian having been photographed wearing his dresses at red carpet events. Last week, actress Mia Wasikowska chose a graphic floral dress from the pre-fall 2015 collection to wear to the Aacta awards. 
Josh Goot has been contacted for comment.
Cape Town’s long-established garment industry was severely damaged in the 1990s when the free market policies of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) opened South Africa’s economy to an influx of imported goods and competition from Asia.
The result was mass factory closures. According to Statistics South Africa, garment industry jobs fell from 220,000 in 2002 to 100,000 in 2011. Cape Town’s Salt River neighbourhood is now scattered with former garment factories converted into foreign-owned call centres or simply lying empty.
Now, however, the race is on to save the industry and Cape Town is emerging as a design capital and manufacturing hub with a refreshing difference – it has safe workplaces and a desire to share the stories of its garment workers.
A key driver of change is the South African Clothing and Textile Workers’ Union (SACTWU). Tired of retailers shipping millions of tonnes of clothes halfway round the world, SACTWU has a buy local policy. To promote this, the union runs shops that stock “Made in South Africa” clothing and is famous for its Spring Queen Pageant in which garment workers model clothes they have made.
Garment workers in South Africa are predominantly women, often single mothers and their family’s soul breadwinner. SACTWU states that 70-80% of garment workers are union members, which places the union in a strong position to negotiate for good conditions.
While the director of SACTWU’s research unit, Etienne Vlok, does not pretend factories are problem-free, he does describe them as good, safe workplaces. “Buy a garment with a Made in South Africa label and you can have peace of mind that the garment was made under good conditions,” Vlok says. “We want to use this as our competitive advantage.”
This desire is mirrored at the luxury end of the industry. The Cape Town Fashion Council represents approximately 300 designers nationwide, and CEO Bryan Ramkilawan emphasises Cape Town’s production quality: “We produce in an ethical way, we are not producing in a sweatshop environment.”
This ethos could be key to ending the factory closures. Ramkilawan points out that many of the designers showing at Cape Town Fashion Week have relatives who worked in the now-closed factories. Being so embedded in the community means their aim is “to create something that isn’t competing directly with cheap Chinese exports, but which is locally produced to empower people and which incorporates elements of South African traditional culture and design”.
It’s not easy, though. The problem Ramkilawan faces is that South Africa doesn’t have multi-brand stores to stock the collections of the people he represents, meaning they must seek markets overseas in places such as London and New York.
Along with the garment workers’ union and the Cape Town Fashion Council, there is another force driving change and environmental sustainability. Inspired by Cape Town’s place as World Design Capital 2014, and by the city’s Design Indabas, Cape Town’s young design community is devoted to design, sustainability and putting South Africa on the fashion map.
One such designer is Zaid Philander, founder of sustainable accessories brand I Scream & Red. He comes from a family of garment workers, many of whom lost their jobs in the late 1990s – a time he describes as horrible.
When he first learned to sew as a little boy, Philander’s feet couldn’t reach the sewing machine peddle and his sister had to devise a contraption from a crutch and a hosepipe that let him sew with his elbow. Some 20 years later the knowledge that “you don’t need to be of a certain height and have two arms and two legs to work a sewing machine” means that the majority of I Scream & Red’s employees are people with disabilities who work using adapted sewing machines. One employee is Zama Sonjika, who had both his legs amputated after an accident, but who now runs his own sewing business.
The neatly-constructed I Scream & Red bags are made from sample books, tents, PVC billboard banners and flags from the City of Cape Town 2010 FIFA World Cup. The bag straps are seatbelts recycled from the Cape Town car pound.
Philander rejects the idea that planet friendly fashion means “recycled hessian potato sacks” and people wearing “scratchy beige fabric”. Instead he argues that “you can have cutting-edge fashion at no cost to the earth and also do it in a responsible way – people in society need the work”.
For Philander, and perhaps for Cape Town, this means rejecting the global fashion model that prioritises cheap materials, immorally low wages and expanded distribution over product: “I believe that it is the worker who comes first, then your product is made and then everything else falls into place,” he says.
Back at the Cape Town Fashion Council, Ramkilawan reiterates the importance of fair production: “A chief part of our success is the story – you can track the garments, you can track who produced the garments, you can even visit the person producing the garments. You can steal the idea but you can’t steal the story.”
This article was amended on 3 February 2015. The original referred to Salt Rock, where it now says Salt River.
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
Couture ends today. From sequinned catsuits at Dior to male bridesmaids at Chanel, here are the highlights
The words the designer Raf Simons used in praise of his teams in the Christian Dior ateliers after the haute couture show on Monday afternoon were interesting: “They have no fear,” he said. The petites mains, the craftspeople of haute couture, are the keepers of the flame in high fashion. They are much lauded for their traditional skills, their long-suffering patience. The techniques handed down through generations, the hundreds of hours of close work behind the scenes, are championed each season.
To praise their fearlessness is rather different. And the choice of words is striking, in the context of Paris this month: whether consciously or not, Simons made a link between the workers’ spirit in the ateliers, and the spirit of the demonstrations on the streets of Paris after the terrorist attacks.
This is a slightly less far-fetched connection than it seems from a London perspective. The great Parisian fashion houses have a place in the city’s mythology and self-image, in a way which has no equivalent in any other capital. This week’s shows were haute couture, the highest echelon of fashion, a tier of the industry which – in contrast to the ready-to-wear catwalks that now happen everywhere from Reykjavik to Nairobi – takes place only in Paris. Haute couture is an expression of French national pride, and of Parisian self-belief.
Catwalk shows are months in the designing, planning and making. This week’s clothes were all conceived long before, rather than in reaction to, the events of the past few weeks. But the editing, staging and styling decisions that happen up until the last moment are hugely important in framing the message of a show. And at haute couture, with its five-figure price tags, almost nobody actually buys the clothes; it is the message that matters.
This was the boldest, bravest, most forward-looking week of haute couture shows Paris has seen in a while. Since Chanel saved seven specialist couture workshops from bankruptcy in the 1990s – an undoubtedly noble move, which preserved several hundred jobs, albeit also a smart strategic one that has elevated the Chanel brand to an unassailable role of the fairy godmother of fashion – the haute couture shows have been a kind of romantic poetry in thrall to these traditions. Haute couture houses, maddeningly coy about exactly how much the dresses cost, or exactly how many clients there are, have loved to shower reporters with statistics about hours: 300 hours’ work on this wedding dress, four hours per metre for this hand embroidery. All of which is undeniably impressive, but has begun to feel slightly unprogressive – Luddite, even – in its focus on repetitive manual labour, the patience and work ethic of the ateliers as somehow more worthy of praise than their technique or accomplishment.
This week, it felt as if ideas and imagination were what mattered. At Dior, Chanel and Giambattista Valli, the tenor of the haute couture – both in the clothes, and in the sets – was bolder and more daring than last season. The headcount of Hollywood celebrities was much lower than is usual for a fashion week that takes place in prime Oscar-dress-shopping time, an absence that some attributed to an unwillingness among American actors to travel to Paris. Perhaps as a result, play-it-safe red-carpet glamour was sidelined in favour of strong fashion pieces. At Schiaparelli, charismatic muse Farida Khelfa brought in Jean-Paul Goude – photographer of Kim Kardashian Breaks The Internet fame – to design a set that starred the French gospel choir Les Cherubins serenading the audience from Juliet balconies set into the walls above their heads. The subversive, surreal codes of Schiaparelli were unmistakable in a print of gloved hands appearing to fasten a trompe-l’oeil embroidered bracelet at the back of a dress. A bracelet was made of seamstress’s pins, the gold points gleaming next to but somehow not piercing the skin. An alarming piece to wear and, beneath the choir above, a small, silent paean to fearlessness.
With bare midriffs and low-slung hip belts, Karl Lagerfeld flirted with bad taste this season. Then there were outsized picture hats swathed in black tulle – for very glamorous beekeepers in mourning? – and Cara Delevingne-ish beanies encrusted with roses. Under the catwalk, 300 engines powered a set of paper flowers that bloomed and coloured as the show unfolded. Where past Chanel shows have referenced the formal elegance of Versailles, this time the garden was allowed to run wild.
The setting for the Christian Dior show – a circus tent of white scaffolding with pink carpets and mirrored walls, and a catwalk snaking around the walls – was designed to disorientate. The same went for clothes that took elements of the 1950s, 60s and 70s and melded them together in an impossible dream sequence of ideas. The loopy jumpsuits were super trippy, while transparent plastic duster coats printed with delicate, inky florals and skintight latex boots in hallucinogenic shades were weird – and, weirdly, gorgeous.
It was, for the most part, glamour-as-usual on the Versace catwalk. But a bold attitude was brought by Donatella’s choice of models for the finale: the 90s supermodels Eva Herzigova, 41, and Amber Valletta, who, at 40, rocks a fabulous undercut. The skintight, flared jumpsuits had a touch of David Bowie about them – a trend echoed the next day in psychedelic swirls and sequinned stripes at Dior’s Moonage Daydream show.
“Elsa’s pioneering spirit” was the theme at the third catwalk show for the relaunched Schiaparelli brand. A hot pink catwalk was reflected in a box-of-mirrors set, with surprises to be spotted from all angles: poker-chip buttons fastening elegant silk trousers, constellations traced across eveningwear, and embroidered bows bursting into three-dimensions, as if the dresses themselves were coming to life.
This collection was a bold statement of intent, from a designer not content with the (lucrative) position of being the fairytale wedding-dress designer of the moment. Taking its queue from the Metropolitan Museum’s Impossible Conversations show, which imagined dialogue between Elsa Schiaparelli and Miuccia Prada, Valli imagined a conversation-in-clothes between Coco Chanel and Janis Joplin, two wardrobe rule-breakers. With cocktail dresses layered over houndstooth trousers, it was a hymn to sartorial irreverence.
Considering that Christian Dior’s most recent financial results showed a 13.4% sales rise to €747m (£560m), in the first six months of last year, we may assume that the designer Raf Simons had free rein to show Monday’s haute couture collection in any Paris venue he chose.
So it is worth taking a moment to consider why he chose to erect an indoor building site – a freshly painted, plushly carpeted one – in the garden of a shuttered 18th-century museum in central Paris.
Since arriving at Dior in 2012, Simons has been on a mission to make the historic house relevant and contemporary. This show venue was a very New Dior conceit, paying respect to the rich history of Paris – and then immediately deconstructing it. Arriving at the gates of the Musée Rodin, currently closed for refurbishment, guests first of all had to navigate the security gates that are a new and sober fixture on the Paris fashion week scene. (In an attempt to maintain standards of glamour, Dior had replaced the grey plastic trays in which handbags are placed to be screened with pristine white boxes.)
Once cleared, guests walked through the shell of the museum – elegant but tired, with the parquet under wraps and the tall windows shuttered – and along the gravel paths to the end of the long formal gardens, where a giant white box was marked, simply, “Dior”. Inside, the venue revealed itself to be a spiral of glossy white scaffolding, with a catwalk snaking upwards in circles, carpeted in soft pink and walled with mirrors.
A utopian construction site, in the grounds of a historic museum which will soon be refurbished and reborn: that, right there, was the key brand message of this haute couture show.
The Dior woman, says Simons, is both “exquisitely decorated and disruptive”. The clothes were a mischievous layering of past and present: not simply nostalgic or straightforwardly futuristic, but rather a 1960s vision of the 21st century.
Transparent plastic rain macs were self-consciously sci-fi, but cut with a retro, swingy line and demure bracelet-length sleeves. A tattoo-printed long-sleeved mesh bodysuit worn under a short-sleeved shift gave a double-take-worthy effect, as if a prim young 1950s wife was sporting two full sleeves of tattoos.
This was a world where not even a ponytail – that simplest, most girlish of hairstyles – was what it seemed.
Look closely, and you noticed that the hair on the models’ scalps ended where it wrapped around the top of a small metal ring suspended from the back of their heads, while the hair hanging down their backs was an entirely separate portion of fake hair, attached to the bottom of the metal ring. It seemed a neat joke about how the level of beauty and elegance achieved on the haute couture catwalks requires from the viewer a suspension of disbelief.
“Periods of time are conflated,” Simons explained of the collection. He berated himself for having previously been guilty of “always thinking of the future … I was always anti-romanticising the past. But the past can be beautiful too. There is a sense of the romance of the 50s, with the experimentation of the 60s and the liberation of the 70sin the collection.”
David Bowie’s swooping Moonage Daydream played on the soundtrack, and a series of sequinned and striped catsuits referenced the Yansai Yamamoto outfits that Bowie wore on his 1973 Aladdin Sane tour, seen in the 2013 V&A exhibition.
The boldness of the fashion message was echoed in what was notably absent from a collection beamed around the world just as actors and stylists are starting to pick out dresses for Oscar night. Three strapless, full-skirted gowns were the only classic eveningwear pieces in a 55-piece lineup of knitted all-in-ones, full-length latex boots and psychedelic stripes. This was cutting edge, not comfort zone.
The collection with which Donatella Versace opened the Paris haute couture shows on Sunday night was sexy and glamorous.
The dresses were long and form-fitting, with slim naked slivers peeled off across the body, as if Donatella had attacked her gowns with a lemon zester.
The models included, star of the original Wonderbra posters, along with fellow 90s name Amber Valletta and current Vogue cover girl Jourdan Dunn.
Hollywood’s power mother-daughter duo, Kate Hudson and Goldie Hawn, sat in the front row.
And in case anyone was still puzzling over the general message, Marvin Gaye’s Sexual Healing accompanied the finale.
Versace is entirely uncomplicated, which is either the label’s strength or weakness, depending on how you take your brands.
It has staked an unrivalled claim on the public consciousness: ask the average consumer to close their eyes and picture a Versace dress, and the image they see is likely to be sharper than for any other brand.
Everyone knows what Versace stands for. This strength and simplicity of image are commercial gold, in the marketing of perfume and makeup.
But for those who like their pop culture with a wink, the absence of irony in the Versace world makes it problematically unsophisticated.
Yet in the 15 years that Donatella Versace has helmed the family label – through some troubled financial rapids, into calm and buoyant waters – the sheer force of her personality and determination has added an emotional power to her signature sucker-punch dresses.
It is worth repeating the fact: Donatella Versace opened the Paris haute couture shows.
The highest, most elite branch of the fashion industry, long dominated by French men, has given pride of place to an Italian woman who has survived personal trauma and drug addiction but now, at 59, is going strong.
Among the limp fairytale narratives of haute couture – where, to judge by the dresses, female fulfilment is a matter of embroidery and weddings – the Jackie Collins plot of the Versace empire is compelling.
Before the show, Donatella Versace described the collection as being “about cut, and the curves of a woman’s body … when we started the collection, I said I wanted no straight lines at all. Every seam is curved”.
The show opened with two black trouser suits which could have come from no other design house: so tight that the spotlights caught each hipbone separately, as the models stalked the catwalk.
Every curve was lovingly highlighted and flashes of skin winked from cut-out shoulders, from plunging necklines, even from split-front flared trousers.
After the briefest nod to daywear, in the form of one long-sleeved dress, the collection segued into a masterclass of red carpet dressing guaranteed to suck up the oxygen of publicity at any event.
There was, as Donatella promised, not a straight seam on the catwalk – and the winding, undulating, sinuous cut combined with an elongated silhouette gave a mesmerising effect of cat-stretched hourglass curves.
There was an air of decadence and mystery at the Maison Margiela autumn/winter show in Paris on Friday, the label’s first menswear collection since John Galliano was installed as creative director.
Invitations had the words “call me” scrawled in messy handwriting on the back, like an end-of-night promise. The venue, 19th-century ballroom Salle Wagram, was filled with smoke and dimly lit in red, evoking an upmarket knocking shop. Fittingly, in the 1800s, it was the site of debauched parties thrown by bohemian French aristocracy. But on this occasion, the guests wondered, who was the host? Before the show, it remained unclear whether Galliano himself was actually responsible for the menswear collection that was about to be presented.
Galliano is currently being rehabilitated in the fashion world, four years after a drunken, antisemitic rant led to him being fired from Dior. Earlier this month, the 54-year-old designer presented his first couture womenswear collection for Margiela in front of an audience of powerful friends (Anna Wintour, Kate Moss) and significant new ones (Rabbi Barry Marcus of London’s Central synagogue). Though notes distributed at the show were typically enigmatic, the press office told the Guardian that this collection had been created by Margiela’s in-house designers without Galliano’s involvement, with the designer’s full reign beginning with womenswear in March.
Still, the rumour mill turned. Would a notorious workaholic such as Galliano really be able to take a back seat? The styling of the show certainly suggested the team had been influenced, consciously or not, by the brand’s new figurehead. Clothes were glitzy and louche, with models wearing leather macintoshes, cuban heels and glittery Lurex jumpers. There was an explicit 1970s theme, an unusual move for Margiela, a house that does not usually refer to specific periods in its design. There were plenty of Margiela tropes also on show, too: edges were unravelled, hems were unfinished and models’ hands were enigmatically dipped in paint. At the end, no one took a bow and, unusually, the backstage area was closed to the press. Was Galliano even in the building? Either way, his ears will have been burning.
On Thursday, the American designer Rick Owens sent models down the catwalk in peep-hole outfits that subtly showed their genitals. The usually unshockable fashion crowd – inured to the sight of bare bottoms and nipples before lunch – were surprised and perplexed; some of the front row were unsure of what they had seen even as they left the venue.
As fashion stunts go, this was quite something. It was, as one editor cheekily described it, a “grower”. Unlike so many Instagram-friendly moments, painstakingly orchestrated on the catwalk but often swiftly forgotten after receiving a few likes, this one seemed designed to last.
It wasn’t until the evening that gossip filtered through, news broke and the designer’s name was trending on Twitter, with #dickowens becoming an Instagram hashtag. Even those who have been rolling their eyes at the fuss, arguing that there is nothing inherently shocking about male body parts, still found themselves deep in the debate.
But what did it mean? According to Rick Owens’ official announcement, the show was about “compression” and “pressure built-up in silent vessels filled with energy” and “the strain of preserving reason under extreme pressure”. The collection also “fetishises the nautical peacoat and cable-knit sweater”, apparently – a line some editors reacted to by asking: “Wow – were there peacoats? I didn’t notice.”
• The standfirst on this article was amended on 27 January 2015 to better reflect the contents of the story.
It’s official. Alessandro Michele – Gucci’s head accessories designer – is to become creative director at the Italian megabrand.
Michele takes up the position left vacant by Frida Giannini, the label’s creative director for 11 years. Giannini’s departure, along with that of her partner, chief executive Patrizio di Marco, was announced in December. The pair were due to work until Gucci’s autumn/winter runway show in February, but this month the company confirmed that Giannini had already left.
Giannini’s departure had been linked with falling sales. Traditionally, Gucci makes up half of all sales at its parent company Kering, which also owns Balenciaga, Stella McCartney and Saint Laurent. In 2013, Gucci experienced the slowest growth in three years – with like-for-like revenues up only 0.2% from the previous year in the final quarter. By contrast, sales at Saint Laurent rose 28%.
Rumours about Giannini’s replacement have been swirling for weeks. New York designer Joseph Altuzarra and Riccardo Tisci of Givenchy were linked to the job, as was Giannini’s predecessor Tom Ford, who had huge success at the brand from 1994 to 2004. That delicious possibility now seems like wishful thinking from an industry thirsty for gossip (an insider from Ford’s eponymous label was quoted as saying there was “no truth” to the suggestion).
Michele’s name was strongly mooted, too, partially because Gucci has a history of hiring from the inside. Michele has been Giannini’s deputy since 2011, just as Giannini was Ford’s deputy in the noughties. The biggest clue that the fingerprints of a Gucci insider were already being seen at the brand came on 19 January, at the presentation of the label’s autumn/winter menswear collection in Milan. The brand was officially rudderless, so fashion critics would have expected the show to concentrate on house classics, rather than presenting new ideas. In fact, the aesthetic had been entirely overhauled, with Gucci’s customary jet-set glitz eschewed for thoughtful 1970s-influenced androgyny – men wore berets and pussybow blouses. The collection received a standing ovation from the front row.
Italian fashion is often judged to be old-fashioned and – some would say – backward-looking, with only Prada, of the big design houses, credited for creating agenda-setting, off-kilter wearables. Is Gucci now attempting to take a slice of that edgier pie? For an answer to that question, all eyes will be on Gucci’s autumn/winter womenswear catwalk show in February.
Another Italian superbrand made news on Wednesday, as Versace named Italian-Belgian designer Anthony Vaccarello – famous for his edgy, highly revealing frocks – creative director of its secondary line, Versus Versace. Vaccarello presented a highly successful capsule line for the Versace offshoot in September at New York fashion week, following in the footsteps of Christopher Kane and JW Anderson. He will make his debut in his new role in February.
The fashion industry has never been short of rock-star designers: Yves Saint Laurent setting flashbulbs popping in Studio 54; John Galliano swaggering down the catwalk for post-show bows at Dior. But what does the designer as rock star look like in the Instagram age?
One possibility is presented by Olivier Rousteing, 28-year-old creative director of Balmain. Rousteing certainly has a face for social media – the sort of features the rest of us fail to achieve even when we suck our cheeks in and apply filters. He puts them to good use on his Instagram feed, where almost a million followers get a daily glimpse of the Balmain lifestyle: glitzy shots backstage at catwalk shows; pictures of parties on Dubai beaches with impossibly beautiful, sometimes famous, friends.
Rousteing’s catwalk shows have become frenzied fashion “moments”. At the unveiling of his spring/summer collection in September, men in suits jostled for seats while Kim Kardashian and Kanye West were blinded by the lights of a scrum of paparazzi from the front row.
In person, Rousteing is every bit as chiselled as his Instagram persona (is there such a thing as selfie resting face?), although more softly spoken, sincere and thoughtful than that image might suggest. Dressed from head to toe in black (Cheap Monday jeans, a Ralph Lauren cashmere sweater, fashion’s regulation-issue beanie), he speaks in elegant, French-accented English peppered with the occasional Valley girl phrase (his parents are “like, literally” so proud of him) and conversation veers from a detailed analysis of Cristóbal Balenciaga’s technical skills to the restorative post-party properties of McDonald’s food.
As well as his youth and beauty, Rousteing stands out for being a black designer in the top creative role at a storied design house. This puts him in a category of one in fashion, an industry that, “for the most part”, he says, “is playing the same game with the same people”. While many designers are criticised for casting mainly white models in their shows, the “Balmain army”, as Rousteing calls them, are always ethnically diverse. He believes the rest of the industry is missing out if it fails to follow suit. “I think it’s because the same people from the 1980s are still on top,” he says. “If they started to go out on the street more, and see how the business really is and who is actually spending money, they would realise that diversity is what helps fashion to still exist.”
Rousteing’s backstory has a fairytale quality: he was born in France and lived in an orphanage until he was one and a half, when he was adopted by a white couple from Bordeaux. His mother was an optician, his father a port manager, and he says his childhood was “perfect, amazing”, very French, very traditional and conflict-free until his late teens, when he realised he didn’t want to become an international lawyer, as his parents had hoped, and moved to Milan to break into fashion. He apprenticed with Roberto Cavalli from the age of 18, stayed for five years (“Italian brands show you – with the money and the power that they have – that they can get everything really quick and really fast. I loved what I learned from them but I think I left because there was a side of their glam that I was no longer into,” he says), then worked under Christophe Decarnin at Balmain.
Decarnin famously dragged Balmain kicking and screaming into the noughties, working with the super-stylist Emmanuelle Alt to transform the label from an off-radar traditional couture house to the toast of the French Vogue set. Known for extreme, highly expensive pieces – ripped, crystal-embellished jeans; biker jackets with spike-shaped shoulder pads – Decarnin’s designs were copied on high streets throughout the world. At the tail end of the hectic period of “Balmania”, he suddenly left the company, and his replacement was a wild card – his right-hand man, Rousteing, then 25 years old, practically a zygote as French fashion houses go.
Rousteing puts his ascent down to ambition, a competitive streak and a workaholic nature: “I always push myself. I want to be first in everything. I want everything fast and I can’t wait.” His drive, he says, “comes from my birth. I was born in an orphanage, so I feel like anything is possible – there are no limits. When you come from nowhere you feel like the world belongs to you.”
“Obviously it was a bit scary,” he continues, “but until you are on the catwalk saying thank you to 500 people and seeing Anna Wintour in the front row you don’t know what [the pressure] is like. Honestly, I think my first collection was really pure. It wasn’t until the end of the show, when I had to go and thank everyone, that I realised my life was going to change; that it’s me under the spotlight. You realise that being an image of the house, as a creative director, is very different to being a designer.”
Under Rousteing, Balmain is still about high-octane glamour – his most famous creations include form-fitting dresses, embellished with the patterns of a Fabergé egg – and he says his vision for the customer is one of confidence. Even when the skin is covered, he says, “Balmain is not about hiding, it’s about showing.” Though this idea is somewhat at odds with the androgynous, understated silhouette that has captivated much of fashion in recent years, it certainly appeals to the young, international and moneyed. Balmain has its eyes on expansion – key markets include London, the bestseller, Italy, China, South Korea and the Middle East – with a stock market flotation the eventual goal. The opening of Balmain’s first European flagship store, in South Audley Street, Mayfair, at the end of January, is a significant part of this plan.
The ideal customer, says Rousteing, is someone like his friend – now also a Balmain campaign star – Kim Kardashian. “She is insanely beautiful, smart, confident, a business woman. I love also that she is not a typical American. She has Armenian origins, she is with Kanye, who is black, and she has a mixed-race daughter. For me, that is how modern couples are.” Kardashian and West are not universally adored by the fashion-loving public, many of whom flooded social media with complaints when the pair appeared on the cover of Vogue last year. This snobbery exists, he believes, because “they don’t understand that this is the new world. They will understand in three years. But it’s going to take time.”
Rousteing is obsessed with the modern, the fresh, the new. His most recent collection was themed around censorship, and featured transparent dresses with glittering black panels across models’ chests. It was partially inspired by Rihanna, who had been banned from Instagram for six months for posting explicit pictures. Though some fashion journalists criticised this concept – suggesting that Rousteing was reflecting pop culture rather than moving it on – he sees depth in the theme: “I’m not acting like a teenager and saying: ‘Oh my God, social media is really important.’ It is more that, as a business person, I see that Instagram is the new way of selling and of communicating. So, as a business person, I was wondering, what are the limits of social media? What can we communicate? It was important for me to show the limits of what you can show and what you can’t show.” And if you still don’t get it? Fashion’s most powerful millennial is confident that you will do, eventually.
Lidl’s fashion prowess knows no bounds: ahead of Burns night on Sunday, the budget supermarket has started selling kilts. The viscose rayon mix skirt costs £29.99 and is part of a collection that includes a pleather sporran for £10 and a haggis for 99p.
Lidl first piloted the design ahead of last summer’s Commonwealth games. This “proto-kilt”, which was three yards shorter and £10 cheaper, sold out almost immediately. The new line has been rolled out in time for this weekend’s celebrations, and the collection is already close to being sold out in both London and Scotland.
But would a true Scotsman wear it? The kilt comes in at the requisite eight yards long, making it legit enough. It’s just the tartan that is causing a minor furore. The design – a muted, forgettable palette of greys, greens and blues – borrows freely from various, disparate tartans. Lidl claims it’s Highland Grey. According to the House of Tartan, it “resembles” Highland Granite. Brian Wilton of the Scottish Tartans Authority says: “It’s not a tartan I recognise”.
There are no hard and fast rules when it comes to copyrighting a tartan, and most of the fashion houses mock up their own to avoid any copyright issues. There are around 11,000 registered and unregistered tartans knocking around, and about 120 new ones are created every year, so it’s nigh on impossible to keep tabs on every single design – it’s basically a free-for-all. Still there is a danger in these “pseudo” tartans “devaluing the genre” explains Wilton. “The problem is technology – there’s a lot of new software out there, which means anyone can design a tartan.”
There is an upside to the rise of the fakers. This renewed boom in tartan – over the past 12 months, the design has been a mainstay at Céline and Calvin Klein, and will be one of the key autumn/winter 2015 trends in menswear, thanks to Topman Design – is having “a demonstrable effect” on Scotland’s tourist industry, as well as the fashion world. Wilton helped design one used exclusively at Brooks Brothers which increased sales by £25m overseas. Why? “People in Asia love tartan.”
Wilton is loth to criticise Lidl too strongly – “it’s probably innocent enough” – and says, as a rule, if they see a rogue tartan design, they just suck it up or send a polite letter to the manufacturer. If an amateur designs a tartan for, say, their wedding? “We just grit our teeth. No one wants to hear their new baby is ugly.”
So, apparently flares are back this season. Can we now all officially laugh at the fashion industry?
It is true that some designers are trying to convince people to buy flares again, which everyone knows is a sign of imminent apocalypse. But, on the bright side, it means we can all enjoy the sight of fashion magazines contorting themselves into advanced yoga positions as – loyal to their advertisers like a dog is loyal to an immoral master – they attempt to pretend that flares are G-R-E-A-T. Look out for darling phrases like this:
Adorable. I do rather love fashion magazines for the way they simply parrot whatever designers tell them to: “You know those shoes we told you to buy five months ago? We told you they were “essential’ to your life? Well, they are now officially DISGUSTING and you need to buy THESE shoes. They’re essential, you know!” Like I say, I love it, but I’ve never really understood it. I get that fashion magazines need advertisers to survive. But film magazines, say, are allowed to give bad reviews, and the studios will still advertise in them. The only negative words you’ll ever see in a fashion magazine are ones used for styles from (ew!) last season. I just don’t get why fashion brands demand total obeisance from magazines in a way no other industry does, or why fashion magazines give it. My incomprehension might explain why I got banned from at least half a dozen designers’ shows when I used to cover them, but that’s another story.
Anyway, this is not a fashion magazine, so I can say with ringing certainty that flares are disgusting. Ooh, the freedom of expression is a delicious thing, isn’t it people? So tangy, but sweet, too, with a pleasant kick of righteousness. Of course flares are horrible: you know it, I know it and anyone in possession of the power of sight knows it. That the fashion industry is trying to convince people to buy them is not a sign that it is laughable, or even wrong, though. No one ever said that fashion is there to make people look good. This is a surprisingly common misunderstanding, leading to that perennial staple in tabloids, the genre I call “HA HA WHAT?!?!?!” journalism. This is when hacks laugh at how STOO-PID the models look in fashion shows: “God, look at the girl wearing a plank of wood on her head!!!! Does the designer think that looks good??!?!?!??” No, they don’t. They think it looks different. Style is the art of looking good; fashion is the endeavour to look different from everyone else while simultaneously looking exactly the same as anyone who follows fashion. It’s sort of like being in a cult, but with less food. So, going by that rubric, flares are perfectly in tune with fashion’s USP. After all, unless your social group consists of Bee Gees tribute groups, they’ll certainly make you different. Not good, mind – but different.
I think the real question to ask here is what other kinds of trousers a designer should advocate instead of flares. Because, the truth is, it’s very tricky to do anything different with trousers without making them look ridiculous, and designers need to do different things or people will just keep wearing the same stuff they wore last season, and what would be the point of that? You can do LOADS to jazz up a dress and still keep it wearable. Trousers? Not so much. Nothing dates a film more specifically than the kinds of trousers the actors are wearing. Really bad bootcut jeans? The 90s! High-cut jeans that flatter absolutely no one? The 80s! In fact, if you ever want to freak yourself out about your own wardrobe, imagine what your kids and grandkids will wear to early-21st-century-themed costume parties. Two words: skinny jeans. (Two more words: Ugg boots.) “God!” they’ll all cry, looking at one another and crying with laughter, “Look at these stupid tight trousers made out of lycra that give everyone a muffin top! Can you believe our ancestors used to wear them?
Flares are not proof of the inherent ridiculousness of the fashion industry. No, not at all. Rather, they are an expression of despair from designers. “For God’s sake!” those flares are wailing. “What do you WANT from us?! Clothes have existed for multiple millennia – there’s only so much you can do with the damn things. With trousers, there are high waists, low waists, wide-legged, skinny-legged – and we’ve done all that. So, do you have any other suggestions?! If so, feel free to send them to us on a postcard. In the meantime, here are some flares. Knock yourselves out!”
This should be your reaction every time fashion designers make something ridiculous, such as flares: not laughter, not anger – just pity. Pity for these poor souls who know that no one, really, is going to buy a £2,000 onesie, but they make one anyway because, well, they need to pad out their collection, and this will make the front pages, right? Even if it’s just the front page of the Daily Mail, accompanied by an article by Angry Columnist Woman about how bad fashion is terrible for humankind. At least it’s something, right? Right? That sound you hear, it’s the sound of a designer gently weeping into his almond macchiato.
• Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
This weekend at the autumn/winter 2015 menswear shows in Milan, the main points could have been summed up by looking at a triumvirate of brands: Dolce & Gabbana, Versace and Prada. It is these three big hitters – and their sometimes wildly different points of view – that set the agenda for Italian menswear and beyond.
Dolce & Gabbana was up first, with its show on Saturday afternoon, and the more social-media-minded of observers would have seen the theme coming. The label, which has been using the #dgfamily hashtag on Instagram in the week leading up to the show, started proceedings by opening a pair of red velvet curtains to reveal a tableau of real-life families. With an age range from two to 82, a throne, and the cast kitted out in ballgowns, hotpants and miniature suits, the effect was of a very glamorous family-reunion portrait. 
Models walked out in front of the families, with a collection broadly based on that theme. Typically opulent, with brocade, fur and silk all featuring heavily, Dolce & Gabbana’s collections are always rich in detail. Sweatshirts came with photoreal family portraits on them, or the phrase “amore per sempre”, while some embroidered pieces used the idea of family crests. The tagging of tops with the “dgfamily” hashtag was probably over-egging things a little but a subtler message did emerge. With casting that ran from teenagers to fiftysomethings, three consecutive looks neatly demonstrated Dolce & Gabbana’s position now. A young man wore the polo shirt, fitted pants and flat cap of a fifties barista; a thirtysomething had on a neat blazer and carried a day bag for work; a 50-odd-year-old sported a more decadent double-breasted suit. What did they convey? This is a brand that can be worn and bought across generations of Italian men.
If Dolce & Gabbana enjoys taking signifiers of national identity and adding its brand voice to the conversation, Versace concentrates on its own dynasty. The world of Versace is where Donatella finds her collection each season, with the aim to reinvent the brand wheel, or at least evolve it, each season. Contrasting from a spring collection that was full of pattern, bold colours and a 1980s aesthetic, this was relatively pared-back – for a brand that loves bling, anyway. The set was industrial, with scaffolding spelling out “Versace” as guests walked in, and models reaching the catwalk via a set of metal stairs. The house “codes” were still there, however, in the form of giant-sized, Instagram-ready medusa head made of scaffolding front row centre above the catwalk.
The clothes stuck to a masculine colour palatte – grey, brown, ivory, blue, black – and created a silhouette that played with volume and rigour. Knitted joggers – described by their designer as “molto sexy” – were paired with slouchy knee-length cardigans, and Oxford bag-style trousers contrasted with a nipped-in blazer. Always with an eye on men with expensive tastes, a fur coat with hood would have been just the thing for an evening in Aspen. Donatella explained that this look – part sport, part louche – was always in the Versace DNA. “Silhouettes, sensuality and fabrics are Versace,” she said. “It was about going back to the start to make a medusa for the next century.” She argued that this was the way for her to inject new ideas into her brand. “Neutral colours are difficult for me,” she said “but you have to change. I hope I have done that by going back to the core of the brand. You can’t always go back to the same thing.” Wise words from a brand matriach – she manages to make things just different enough each time out.
Prada’s Sunday night show spurned any idea of family or convention. Instead, designer Miuccia Prada did exactly what she wanted – as always. Despite these being the men’s shows, her collection featured an almost equal number of male and female models. It was shown in a set that looked like a space ship, all low ceilings, corridors of shredded chrome and anterooms. The clothes concentrated on the idea of “uniforms” – both explicitly in school kilts and air steward jackets but also conceptually. One uniform – that presumably of the office worker – was in focus with macs, briefcases and a work-friendly colour palette of grey, navy and black. Sounds boring, perhaps, but was anything but. And that’s why Prada wins every time. She is the queen of Milan – and worldwide – fashion.
The fact that Milan’s latest fashion week is for menswear is a mere detail for Miuccia Prada. Her autumn/winter 2015 show on Sunday evening, always the agenda-setting highlight of the schedule, had an almost equal split between men’s and women’s looks.
It follows two seasons where a few female models featured in the men’s show but upped the womenswear count significantly. Asked for the reason after the show, she said: “When I think about men, I also think about clothes for women. I describe these clothes as another point of view.”
Not one to let convention get in the way of an idea, Prada just showed clothes for both. In Prada’s world, gamechanging is as simple as that.
In an uncharacteristically revelatory mood, this move was announced with show notes on each seat. That is a rarity at a Prada show, where the audience is usually on their own in figuring out the thoughts of one of fashion’s biggest influencers each season. The notes declared this show as an opportunity to “measure what genders share, what they take from each other”.
The collection wasn’t about wearing each other’s clothes, however. Instead of the hackneyed boyfriend aesthetic for women, and androgyny for men, Prada looked to uniforms, a type of clothing where designs for men and women intentionally mirror each other, rather than borrow. Largely navy, black and grey, the collection featured double-breasted jackets with a naval influence, kilts for women like a school uniform and suits for men that had something of the sixties air steward about them.
The winning uniform, however, was one more familiar: that of the office worker at rush hour. Each model carried a work bag of some description, and the mac, a commuter staple, was worn by both genders.
There were then typical Prada details to add an off-kilter feel: drooped grosgrain ribbons on dresses, pineapple ponytails for women, shoes with moulded platforms and the cuff of a neat sleeve pulled up to reveal the lining.
The set was hardly literal either. It resembled a spaceship rather than an office. The audience sat in a series of anterooms with low ceilings, corridors with chrome mesh and photo wallpaper of a Milky Way pattern. Prada herself compared it to a nightclub – a comparison made all the more appropriate through a soundtrack of eighties electro.
The designer, wearing a kilt, referred to a “uniform, a strictness” as inspiration and said she refined the clothes down to the essential pieces: “You edit and you edit and all you are left with is the black and blue and grey.”
Except, that was, for a rogue plaid coat towards the end. “No one wanted to put it in but I was fixated,” she revealed. “I like some mistakes.” The addition of womenswear into the men’s collection isn’t one such mistake, however. Prada suggested that this dual gender show will continue at her shows during the menswear season, and that these pieces will be available to buy in addition to the existing womenswear collections.
An eye for new product categories comes at a good time for the brand. In the nine months to December 2014, net profits for the Prada Group dropped by 27.6% to £282.15m.
Analysts have said that is down to less consumer spending, and a drop in tourism in Europe. Leather goods, traditionally a core part of Prada’s business, were particularly affected, with a 6% decrease in sales. In response to this, the brand plans to produce more bags with lower price points, at around the £1,000 mark. A new Prada perfume will also be released later this year.
Salvatore Ferragamo, the Italian luxury group that made shoes for Marilyn Monroe and handbags for Margaret Thatcher, ended 2014 on a high, the company’s boss said.
Speaking at the Milan stock exchange, where Ferragamo was showing its autumn/winter 2015 menswear collection, chief executive Michele Norsa said December sales were “even better than our expectations”.
“We closed 2014, which was an eventful year with a lot of volatility, with a very strong end of the year,” he said, according to Reuters.
The Florentine fashion house, known for its classic sensibility, saw a 4.6% increase in sales in the first nine months of 2014 to €957m (£730m).
Norsa dismissed concerns about deflation in the eurozone, where prices fell in December for the first time in five years. “What is more important is consumer confidence,” he said.
Last week, Swiss luxury goods group Richemont revealed that a crackdown on corruption in China and pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong had dampened demand for its watches and jewellery. But Ferragamo has been insulated from slowing demand in China by its large presence in global airports, as more travellers go shopping to kill time. Norsa said he expected that travel retail would continue to drive growth in 2015.
Sam Taylor-Wood’s adaptation of the bestseller is not yet in cinemas but there were 50 shades of grey on the Calvin Klein catwalk at Milan’s menswear fashion week on Sunday afternoon.
The autumn/winter 2015 collection by Italo Zucchelli, Calvin Klein’s creative director, was inspired by the colour palette of black and white movies. Shades included slate, dove, granite and charcoal with touches of black and white. This allowed the designer to play, instead, with texture and cut. Suiting was embossed with cheetah patterns, and the gleam of PVC played off textured knitwear. Cuts were either loose – oversized drop-shouldered overcoats – or skintight. A section of the show introduced a cropped, fitted bomber jacket, worn with high-waisted trousers, a harder sell away from the catwalk.
What Zucchelli excels at is finding a formula for a season and showing it from every angle – something that makes sense in menswear, an arena where tweaks to tried-and-tested formulas trump seasonal overhaul. This show was repetitive – there were five versions of the PVC trousers and jumper combination – but it didn’t feel samey. The looks worked as subtly different studies of one idea, a technique that makes sense for a brand that had its roots in minimalism.
The designs with commercial potential also had a uniform aspect. Most models wore hiking boots and had a neat, slicked-back hair style. While Zucchelli has explored a nineties-influenced sports aesthetic in recent collections – neoprene sweatshirts with the logos of the brands perfumes Obsession and Escape were a hit last winter – this felt more work than play.
An overcoat worn over a suit with a fine-knit mohair sweater and white T-shirt was a recurring theme. It was almost futuristic with Zucchelli’s precise cuts but, broken down, the component parts of suit, jumper and coat can be found in the wardrobes of most professional men. A mix of concept and commerce drives Calvin Klein menswear.
The brand is emphasising digital growth this year. Invitations for this show had #calvinkleinlive printed on them, inviting the front row to use the hashtag when posting on Instagram. This follows last year’s successful #mycalvins campaign around the relaunched branded underwear. Users of Instagram, including celebrities Kendall Jenner, Miranda Kerr and Daisy Lowe, posted selfies of themselves wearing the underwear, with the hashtag eventually generating 11m likes, shares and comments across 25 countries. The new advertising campaign for Calvin Klein Jeans, featuring model Lara Stone and singer Justin Bieber, continues the brand message, with #mycalvins in the top right hand corner.
E-commerce is next. Sites exist across Europe and America and a Chinese version, calvinklein.cn, launches in March. This is projected to bring double-digit growth to the brand in the region by 2020.
Milan’s menswear shows have seen a trend for real life winter-ready layering. Bottega Veneta’s collection on Sunday morning fitted this theme – linen macs, soft-cotton hooded tops, corduroy tracksuit pants and silk skinny scarfs were included. The Salvatore Ferragamo show layered longer, chunky knitwear under boxy bikers, and some models wore two jackets and oversized scarves. This followed Versace’s show on Saturday, a somewhat sober mix of knitwear, suiting and outerwear in a neutral palette. The brand’s trademark flamboyance wasn’t overhauled completely, though – there were full-length fur coats, Mongolian lamb-work bags and knitted joggers in four-ply cashmere.
Trends need not be fickle engines of pure consumerism. We have them in ethical living, too you know. 2015 is all about self-reliance. More dynamic than the downshifting trend (work fewer hours, move to the countryside, keep bees), self-reliance is about actively claiming ownership of our lives and wresting supply chains from global corporations. So from food to finance, watch out for local organisations which offer alternative ways of doing things and systems that are not reliant on the whims of big business or local government.
In 2015 there are no extra points for recycling, saving energy or using the bus, not the car – these are settled behaviours that you should be doing automatically. The kitchen and garden (or community garden or allotment), where we carry out transformative processes like composting, are at the heart of self-reliance. Take your lead from foodie trends that aim to localise parts of the food chain, wrestling them back from food corporations and their impactful supply chains.
One way to do this is by processing your own food. Get acquainted with archaic-sounding kitchen verbs: brewing, fermenting, brazing, curing. For the philosophy, see Michael Pollan’s Cooked: a Natural History of Transformation. For the practical, check out the abundance of courses out there: livingfood.co.uk offers fermentation and oosha.co.uk offers raw chocolate-making, or seek out kits and accessories like fermentation pots (peppermintheath.co.uk).
Growing your own food remains fundamental to ethical living, but things are getting aspirational here. Self-confessed “plant geek” James Wong’s Homegrown Revolution will have you growing saffron and goji berries on a UK allotment. Also try the UK’s biggest seed-swapping event, Seedy Sunday, in Brighton on 1 February. Presenter Kate Humble has a brilliant range of courses on everything from lambing (March/April) to growing your own wedding flowers (May) on her working farm in Wales (humblebynature.com).
Greening your money gives you a buffer from the vagaries and injustices of the global financial structure. Good Money Week is in October, but the principles last all year around (goodmoneyweek.com).
Over the last decade I’ve watched – and occasionally tried to intervene – as clothes lovers become captive customers. Super-cheap fast fashion means disposability. Don’t buy for landfill. Fight back. DIY fashion needn’t mean knitting worthy jumpers, as Secrets of Sewing Lingerie (Kyle Books, £15.99) makes clear. The bourgeoning craft handmade movement is important for local economic relationships and capitalises on the ethical benefits of shorter supply chains.
So in 2015 avoid a monocultural existence where you devolve responsibility to a few corporate brands for your food, entertainment and technology. Instead look for the biodiversity of local organisations and alternative ways of living.
There is no such thing as rubbish, just a paucity of imagination. That’s how businesswoman Donna Fenn from Harrogate sees it. She set up Remadeinbritain.com as a hub for the growing upcycling community to unite customers with makers who add value to discarded materials through design and ingenuity. So far there are 300 retailers selling furniture, interiors, lighting, clothing, jewellery and accessories, including products by this column’s favourite neo-Womble, designer Max McMurdo. Fenn is partly driven by opportunity (280m tonnes of waste are produced here each year, so imagine the repurposing possibilities) and a bit of shame – based on recycling figures, the UK is only just inside the top 10 countries in Europe, and way behind Austria and Germany (remadeinbritain.com)
The film-going audience is well used to apocalyptic scenarios. But in this sub-genre, climate change gets central billing as sci-fi films (and books) move on. The latest cli-fi flick out there is Interstellar
If you have an ethical dilemma, email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk
Wearable tech should be sexy. What could be more thrilling than a skirt that twinkles with LEDs on the dancefloor, or a dress that transforms from midi to maxi at the touch of a button? How about a jacket with built-in wifi? Indeed, what could excite the fashion industry, driven by thirst for the new, any more?
Yet, when the topic is raised in fashion circles, eyes glaze over and yawns are stifled. The problem is not a lack of enthusiasm for tech, given that most editors, buyers and designers are iPhone virtuosos, spending the year running around fashion shows, glued to Instagram. What is not adding up is what wearable tech is and what it can do.
Hussein Chalayan was making spookily futuristic automated catwalk dresses as long ago as 2006; Richard Nicoll showed a breathtaking light up dress at London fashion week in September. But nothing that thrilling seems anywhere near point of sale. We have been hearing about T-shirts that monitor heart rate and muscle density, which make sense for sports fans but are not as compelling as beautifully-cut trousers for those who are into fashion.
Tory Burch has produced branded fitness tracker bands, but to the lay consumer the distinction between these and similar iPhone apps is not obvious. Opening Ceremony has launched varsity jackets with integrated phone chargers, but the advantage over putting a charging case on your phone seems negligible. So far, wearable tech seems to be a way for early adopters to experiment and be seen at the vanguard of innovation, rather than creating burning consumer desire. None of the big British fashion retailers are putting wearable tech at the centre of their buying strategies for spring/summer 2015.
The Apple Watch has piqued fashion’s interest, however, with the company wooing Anna Wintour and Karl Lagerfeld at Paris fashion week and the Watch appearing on the cover of Chinese Vogue. But whether the Watch is an outlier – and whether it is a true wearable or a smartphone that happens to be strapped on to one’s wrist – is debatable. Similarly, two small but intriguing product launches for 2015 – US designer Rebecca Minkoff’s bracelets that charge iPhones, on sale in February, and Ringly’s vibrating rings, which activate when your phone rings and launch in January, seem more like chic gadgets than true fashion.
Getting people “obsessed” – as the fashion industry would say – will require products with a useful, clear purpose that are aesthetically on point. There has been talk about whether women will wear bulky, masculine devices, and many of the resulting ideas – feminine, pastel-coloured trinkets – are at odds with trends towards functional wear and minimalism. The involvement of the industry’s most influential designers – the likes of Chanel, JW Anderson, Céline, Stella McCartney, Prada, and on the high street Topshop, Cos, Zara – would address this.
In January 2014, Lagerfeld sent Chanel’s couture models down the catwalk wearing trainers, bestowing fashion’s official blessing on flat shoes, and a million tills started ringing. Wearable tech needs such a watershed moment. You can bet design houses are quietly meeting experts, eager to ensure they are not left behind, but cautious about rushing out a product that flops.
In Britain, Burberry may well make the first move. The company is famed for technological innovation and has a dedicated “what if?” division exploring such areas. Still, 2015 feels a bit early for that turning point – unless someone in the industry has a closely guarded secret up their sleeve. In any case, with the Apple Watch a sure topic of conversation at the next round of fashion weeks in February, this will be the year fashion’s enthusiasm for wearable tech truly flourishes.
“Is that an Apple Watch?” is a phrase likely to ring out in the spring of 2015 when the result of the company’s highly anticipated foray into wearable technology finally hits the shelves.
For Apple, the Watch is the first completely new product since the iPad and Steve Jobs’s death in 2011. Its initial success is guaranteed.
“Even if it only told the time, Apple is likely to sell millions of them with the first launch,” said Ben Wood, head of research at analysts CCS Insight. “Apple makes beautiful things and the Watch is beautifully engineered. Combined with its brand credentials it’s going to be a fashion statement and a status symbol with a much broader appeal than current smartwatches.”
But for market watchers it’s not what the Watch can do for Apple but what Apple can do for everyone else.
Wearable tech is not all about what springs from Apple’s headquarters in Cupertino, California. This year, Google joined Pebble, the pioneer of the modern smartwatch, with a plethora of Android wear. Google watches from LG, Sony and Motorola landed on users’ wrists from June – some attractive, others less so – while Samsung released not one but five smartwatches in 2014.
Makers of fitness trackers and smartclothing are vying to prove there’s life beyond smartwatches: more than 70m fitness wearables sold globally this year, seven times the number of smartwatches, according to Gartner research.
“I’m expecting smart wristbands like the Jawbone Up to do well this Christmas, as the capabilities and costs have come down to a level where they make good gifts,” said Angela McIntyre, a research director at Gartner.
Come January, all eyes will be on Las Vegas for the world’s largest technology trade show – International CES – where manufacturers from across the globe will be pushing their latest wearable gadgets hoping that something will catch punters’ eyes.
Crowdfunding platforms may also deliver some interesting wearables next year. According to George Jijiashvili, wearables analyst for CCS Insight, anything from a device to make a normal watch “smart” to wireless earbuds that track heart rate, activity and play music, all without a smartphone, are pitching for funding.
Technology researcher Gartner expects another 68m wearable fitness devices to be sold worldwide in 2015 as lower price gadgets make them more accessible. The Misfit Flash and Jawbone Up Move, for example, cost less than £50.
But it is advanced heart rate monitoring devices such as Intel’s Basis Peak and the Jawbone Up3, the follow-up to the successful Up wristband, that will power greater insight into fitness and sleep for many.
“Heart rate monitoring is likely to be the big thing in 2015 for most people looking at wearable technology,” said McIntyre. “It’s been around for the past couple of years, but it’s getting better, more affordable and has that cool factor, particularly around wristbands and watches.”
The Up3 has electrical skin sensors that promise to monitor health through heart rate, not while a user exercises but in the moments before and after falling asleep or waking up.
“That’s the only time when stress, caffeine and everything else can’t affect your beats for a true picture of how healthy you are,” said Jason Donahue, of Jawbone.
Chip maker Intel is also making moves in wearable technology. The Basis Peak fitness watch promises 24-hour heart-rate tracking using an optical sensor that shines a light into the skin. The Peak can monitor the crucial stages of sleep and the quality of a night’s kip using heart rate, rather than just quantity, as most others do.
Smartwatches will be in on the health and fitness tracking game in 2015 too. Most Google smartwatches have heart rate monitors and the Apple Watch will have one too.
Collecting all that data is useless if users can’t do anything with it, though. Google, Microsoft and Apple announced free health-tracking services this year, each aiming to help users understand their health data.
It promises to be the year where the number of steps you take and hours of sleep you get will generate meaningful suggestions, either for the user or their doctor.
Wearable technology will not be limited to obvious gadgets, and 2015 is predicted to be the year when smartclothing finally becomes a reality beyond light-up Christmas jumpers. Once the domain of elite athletes, smartclothing is slowly filtering down the high street.
Clothing brands such as Adidas, Under Armour and Ralph Lauren, which showed off its new smartshirt at the US Open tennis tournament, are starting to make sports tops with built-in heart-rate and respiration monitoring.
“Smartshirts can measure things like heart rate and respiration much more accurately and without having to wear another device, because they can embed more sensors across a larger area,” said McIntyre.
More than 10m smart garments are expected to be sold in 2015, displacing conventional chest straps and other sports enthusiast gear. Smartsocks, motion tracking underwear and light reactive jackets that glow the harder you train are in the pipeline.
Fitness is just one area being explored by smartclothing, with manufacturers envisaging GPS shoes, colour changing ties and smartphone charging jackets. Even beachwear could go smart with bracelets that track your desired tan level and swimwear that changes colour when you have had enough sun.
The sad and sorry tale of normcore, 2014’s most forced of forced memes, actually begins in the summer of 2010 in downtown Manhattan, where five friends who had just graduated with arts degrees were making ends meet by working for marketing agencies.
In the course of that work, each of them had to sit through cultural trend forecasts, PDF or PowerPoint presentations juxtaposing cliched stock photography with Nathan Barley-ish neologisms predicting the future. Between their inward groans and suppressed giggles, the friends recognised something of great value, a familiar form no other artist had yet nicked. Meeting at their apartments after work, they took the idea and created an art project that took the form of a trend-prediction agency called K-Hole that used the forecast medium to present serious ideas.
They began publishing their own downloadable PDFs; gradually, galleries invited them to exhibit. In October 2013, for a group exhibition at London’s Serpentine Gallery, they published a report called Youth Mode: A Report on Freedom, one chapter of which was entitled “Normcore”.
The report lay dormant for five months. However, unbeknown to the group, one of their flatmates had mentioned the term to a journalist friend. In February, Fiona Duncan wrote a piece for New York magazine claiming the term had been coined to signify a hipster trend for dressing “like tourists”, in white socks and trainers, stonewashed jeans and polo necks.
The story immediately set off a hilarious scrap among some young American journalists, with one, Christopher Glazek, publicly accusing Duncan of mistaking normcore (actually meant to be about people adopting identities to fit in with social groups) for “ActingBasic”, another idea in the report, to do with wearing non-designer-label clothes. Duncan apologised and blamed the New York editors: “I’ve felt an extraordinary amount of pain over this for the last few days,” she wrote on Facebook, four days after the piece was published. “My face broke out in eczema from the stress/frustration, seriously.”
The esoteric nature of the debate was soon lost when the international fashion pack, then travelling together on the autumn/winter show circuit, caught wind of the story during London fashion week. Plagued by editors hungry for trends and street-style stories, however, fashion journalists and bloggers quick off the mark applied it to a nascent trend among some stylists and designers for unostentatious, pared-back style – and a misappropriation was born.
Gap’s social media had already borrowed the term on 27 February (“We’ve been carrying your #normcore staples since 1969”, went one tweet). By 10 March, Vogue.com was asking: “What comes after normcore?””, before reviving it on 21 March, and then proclaiming Kate Middleton the “Duchess of normcore” in April.
Of course, no one, not even fashion journalists, ever seriously referred to themselves as “normcore”; at best, it was an ironic way of saying you weren’t getting dressed up. It soon became a term that could mean whatever you wanted it to, from “anti-fashion” to “wilfully anonymous”, but that didn’t stop journalists, academics and businesses from picking it up: as interest peaked in May and June, the beleaguered people at K-Hole were fielding up to 50 inquiries a week.
“We didn’t know whether to explain that what they were talking about wasn’t actually what we meant, or whether to just go with it,” explains Greg Fong, one of the five co-founders. “The brands were very interested in how we went viral, but we hadn’t actually sought that. It was a strange experience – I started to feel guilty about all the negative connotations it took on.”
Since the summer, the word has featured in a piece in the Lancet (the Lancet! The peer-reviewed Lancet!), been named by the Oxford University Press as a runner up to “vaping” for neologism of the year and come full-circle by being used as thinly concealed inspiration for Gap’s autumn “Dress Normal” ad campaign. K-Hole has been retained to consult at several tech and fashion companies.
Are there any lessons for them to learn? “Well,” says Fong, “I think it turned into a word people could use to discuss some social issues to do with our normative society and its discontents. But the other thing this all taught me is that the media is incredibly thirsty. For anything.”
Last week, I went to Tokyo for a Christian Dior show. Yeah, I know, that’s what everyone asks: Dior in ... Tokyo? Not Paris? Huh? And then they shake their heads in a fashion-people-are-crazy kind of a way.
No. There is method in this madness, and shrewdness in this extravagance. Dior’s Tokyo pre-fall event represents an emerging strategy by the great Parisian fashion houses to retain status by detaching themselves from the decline of France, and reposition themselves as global brands. The phenomenon of the catwalk show on tour – just a week earlier, Chanel staged one in Salzburg, Austria, and has previously shown in Dubai – is a ploy by which the aristocracy of the fashion industry, who for generations ruled the seas of style unchallenged, intend to maintain their supremacy in a globalised economy.
The most striking part of the Tokyo show was that the Dior collection was not Japanese in any obvious way. There were no wide sleeves or obi belts to be seen. Instead, it was steeped in the essence of Tokyo as a modearticle originally stated that Katie Hillier was a Central Saint Martins graduate. In fact she attended the University of Westminster.
The woman widely credited with transforming Mulberry from a quiet British fashion house into a must-have global brand has shocked the luxury goods world, and the City, by announcing her intention to quit, in a move that wiped nearly £40m off the company's value.
Emma Hill joined Mulberry as creative director at the depth of the recession in 2008 and, hitching the firm's conservative reputation to hipster royalty such as Alexa Chung and Lana Del Rey, helped spur a fivefold increase in its share price.
Mulberry issued a terse confirmation that one of the industry's most successful partnerships is coming to an end, amid rumours of a falling out between Hill and the chief executive, Bruno Guillon, over the company's direction.
"Mulberry confirms that Emma has informed the company that she wishes to leave after a very successful period at Mulberry 