employees in similar jobs. This merits serious examination from government, with an official measure of agency workers being a good place to start.”
Agency workers defy stereotypes: many work in high-end industries such as IT consultants, and the majority are not low-skilled migrants, stay-at-home mums or students as is often thought.
However, the research also found that agency workers are disproportionately drawn from ethnic and other minorities and are more concentrated in low-paid industries and lower-skilled jobs.
The TUC highlighted the growing use of the loophole known as the Swedish derogation. This loophole allows agency workers placed with companies to be paid less than direct employees, provided the agency agrees to continue paying them for at least four weeks at times when it is unable to find them work.
Agency workers are more likely to be younger and less qualified than the rest of the workforce, and four out of five are white. However, 8% of all black and African Caribbean workers in the UK are agency staff, even though they only make up 2.7% of the overall workforce.
Six in 10 agency workers are UK nationals, compared to more than eight in 10 in the overall workforce. EU nationals account for 22% of agency workers while people from the rest of the world make up 17%. Ethnic minorities are three times more likely to be agency workers than white workers.
Dictators and human rights abusers who buy luxury property in London and use the UK to conceal their wealth could have their assets seized under an MPs’ initiative.
A group of backbenchers are seeking to amend the government’s criminal finances bill and introduce a clause targeting those guilty of human rights abuses outside Britain. It would allow officials and organisations such as Amnesty International to apply for an order to freeze their UK assets.
The amendment is named after the Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, who died in prison in Moscow in 2009 after exposing an alleged $230m (£181m) fraud carried out by leading Kremlin officials.
The initiative enjoys unusually wide cross-party support. Labour’s Chris Bryant said the chances of it becoming law were “quite positive”.
The bill, which could come into force as early as spring 2017, is designed to clean up London’s reputation as a haven for “dirty money”. Its existing provisions target corrupt politicians and international criminals who launder money through the capital’s banks and plough stolen cash into high-end real estate.
The National Crime Agency estimates that up to £100bn of dubious money passes through the UK a year. The Magnitsky amendment, which will be tabled on Monday, could result in high court judges passing two-year freezing orders on human rights abusers. There will be a right to appeal.
The Conservative MP Dominic Raab, who tabled the amendment, said: “People with blood on their hands for the worst human rights abuses should not be able to funnel their dirty money into the UK. This change in the law will protect Britain from becoming a safe place for despots and dictators to hide their money.”
The former Labour MP Denis MacShane said going after the London assets of state functionaries was “an updated version of getting Al Capone on tax evasion charges because it was not possible to bring him to justice for murder”.
“It will sow panic in the ranks of Putin apparatchiks who want to own flats and hide money in London, and send children to private schools in the UK,” he said.
Supporters of the proposal include the Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas, the SNP and the Ukip MP Douglas Carswell. The Labour MP and former public accounts committee chair Margaret Hodge said Britain had been “a safe haven for foreign kleptocrats and their ill-gotten gains” for too long, adding: “We hope this legislation will end this.”
The Home Office says the bill, introduced in October, will significantly improve the government’s ability to tackle money laundering and corruption, recover the proceeds of crime and impact upon terrorist financing. It follows an anti-corruption summit hosted by the then prime minister David Cameron in May and revelations in the Panama Papers that foreign autocrats and their families used offshore structures to buy London property.
Under the Magnitsky amendment, the names of individuals who have been involved in, or profited from, human rights abuse would be published. Ministers would be obliged to apply for an order if they are presented with compelling evidence of abuse and it is in the public interest to do so.
The amendment is the latest in a series of legislative initiatives around the world to end the impunity of those involved in the Magnitsky case and other human rights abuses. In 2012, the US Congress passed a Magnitsky act, which sanctioned the Russian officials involved and provoked a furious backlash from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.
Britain’s information commissioner has reopened the file on construction industry blacklisting amid fears that the malpractice is still taking place.
Elizabeth Denham, who is charged with protecting data privacy, told the Guardian she has already “reviewed” her office’s papers on blacklisting since taking up the post in July.
The 57-year-old Canadian is so concerned by the scandal, which was seemingly settled in court this year, that she told staff to begin “a watching brief” on the construction industry to make sure the practice has ended.
Denham, who was previously the information and privacy commissioner for British Columbia in Canada, said: “I read about that case, I’ve looked into that case, and it was deeply concerning.
“That practice was deeply concerning to me, and we do have some follow-up plans and that’s all I can say right now: we are following up. I think the practice is something we have to be alert to checking, to make sure that it has ceased.
“It means keeping tabs, it means a watching file, a watching brief … It’s fair to say that I’ve reviewed that file.”
The blacklisting scandal hit the headlines when the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) raided a Worcestershire-based company called the Consulting Association in 2009.
The organisation kept a list of more than 3,000 workers, including details – often incorrect – of their political views and trade union activities that were used to vet them when applying for jobs. There were also notes on personal relationships and suggestions that workers were incompetent.
Some of the biggest names in the construction sector, including Balfour Beatty, Carillion, Costain, Laing O’Rourke and Sir Robert McAlpine, settled with the GMB, Ucatt and Unite unions this year on allegations of using the list. The companies denied blacklisting, arguing that automatic discrimination did not occur when the lists were used.
Nevertheless, the practice was rumoured for years. It is alleged to have gone on for more than four decades and the Consulting Association’s data stretched back to the early 1990s. Workers were checked against the list for jobs on publicly funded projects such as the London 2012 Olympic Park and the Millennium Dome.
Unite’s settlement saw 256 workers share more than £10m in compensation this year. GMB and Ucatt, which is the main construction workers’ union with 80,000 members in the UK and Ireland, received about £75m for 771 claimants in April.
However, it has long been feared that the practice is deeper rooted than the initial investigation found and that blacklisting continues.
The ICO is best known for making sure that companies and the government adhere to the 1998 Data Protection Act, and for monitoring the correct use of the 2000 Freedom of Information Act. It also tackles the misuse of personal data, meaning that blacklisting is within the ICO’s remit.
The GMB national secretary, Justin Bowden, said: “The GMB would welcome further investigation into the nefarious activities of systematic blacklisting of 3,500 trade unionists and environmental activists by the household names of the construction industry.
“We have always called for greater rigour by the ICO alongside a public inquiry, and for blacklisting to become a criminal offence punishable by prison and unlimited fines.”
Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said: “Blacklisting in construction was an appalling scandal and the victims have never had full justice. That’s why we called for a full inquiry that could also consider whether the law itself needs to be changed.
“Ministers can’t just leave this to the information commissioner and it’s well past time they stepped in and took proper action, to ensure all those involved are accountable and this never happens again.”
In July I paid an American cheque for $24,000 into my Barclays current account, and four months on it has not cleared. I have repeatedly asked Barclays what is going on – at around £19,300 this is a huge amount of money – and have been getting endless excuses and conflicting information.
After refusing to leave the branch one day I was taken into the bank manager’s office and told by a manager that Barclays had “fallen out” with a holding bank and there was a delay on the cashing of US cheques dating back to March.
The latest information I have is that this holding bank has severed all communication with Barclays and there is a chance “I will never get this money”, as one Barclays representative told me. Barclays International team has been trying to contact the holding bank for three months, I am told.
I don’t understand how this can happen. I believe Barclays has a duty of care to be honest and transparent, and also to be able to cover funds if there is an internal problem. I am having to use my savings to keep my business afloat. How many other people are in this position?
Most readers would be similarly incredulous to be told by a branch manager that there was no immediate prospect of getting such a large sum credited to their account. Barclays HQ told us that what you had been told (more than once by bank staff) was not correct and that it has not experienced issues with US banks, or the supplier “holding” bank. It says that this was an isolated case that has only affected you.
Crucially, it has acted quickly to pay the lost money into your account. It has also offered an extra £517 to say sorry and to cover lost interest. It adds: “This was a genuine error where there was a delay in releasing funds, and falls short of the brilliant experience we want all our customers to have. We have apologised… and transferred the full amount to the customer and offered a gesture of goodwill to cover any inconvenience and confusion caused.”
The only question that remains is what caused the problem? We wonder whether money-laundering rules may have something to do with it. The bank can’t tell customers when they are investigating possible laundering as it is deemed to be tipping off.
Meanwhile, you might want to ask clients to pay you by bank transfer. It’s incredibly risky sending cheques for such large sums in the post. Much better to get the money sent electronically – with a small test payment at the start.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Our careers expert – and you the readers – advise a school librarian who wants to visit their prospective employer and someone whose job will end after Brexit
A vegetarian restaurant owner’s decision not to accept the new £5 note because it contains traces of meat byproducts has come under fire from vegetarians and omnivores alike.
Sharon Meijland, who has run the Rainbow cafe in Cambridge for three decades, said she would not allow customers to pay with the polymer note because the animal byproduct tallow is used during the production process.
The businesswoman said she had been shocked and frightened by some of the online reaction to her decision, but that customers had supported her stance.
“Our own customers who are actually in the restaurant in Cambridge have been very favourable, but it is people on Facebook – there’s been a good deal of charming comments such as ‘I hope this comes back to bite you in the ass’,” she said.
On Twitter, Stephen Coltrane said he had eaten at the Rainbow cafe and enjoyed it, but that Meijland’s stance was an “over-reaction”.
Robbie Weir tweeted: “Pretty hypocritical when the food on your menu … contains animal products.”
Denise Venn tweeted: “I’m veggie and I find this so embarrassing. We’re not all this stupid.”
Others accused Meijland, 66, of seeking publicity, but she rejected the claim and said some people were reacting in such a way “because I made a stand”.
Meanwhile, former Smiths frontman Morrissey has hit out at the animal fat contained in the fiver.
The Meat is Murder singer said on his True To You fan site: “If it had been revealed by the Bank of England that the new British five pound note contained slices of cat or dog, the country would be in an uproar.
“But because we have been trained to accept the vicious slaughter of cows, sheep and pigs, the UK media can only make light of the use of tallow in the new British fiver because animal slaughter is thought to be outside of the human grasp and concern.”
He suggested anyone who did not take issue with the revelation that traces of tallow are used in the production process should donate their own bodies for “decorative use in future £5 notes”.
More than 125,000 people have signed a petition calling on the Bank of England to remove tallow from the new notes.
After signing it, Meijland said she spoke with staff and they decided they could not justify handling the notes.
“We all said we all felt very uneasy about handling it. We thought the only way round this is to just not accept them.”
Vowing to stick with the decision, she added: “I am shocked and frightened at my age to get such hatred [online].”
She said the cafe had been runnerup in the best ethical restaurant category in the Observer Food Monthly awards for the last five years.
Polymer bank notes, which last far longer than their paper equivalents, were developed in Australia.
Prof David Solomon, who led a CSIRO team that created the notes, said this week that the tallow controversy was “absolutely stupid”, adding: “There’s trivial amounts of it in there.”
As well as being robust and difficult to forge, Solomon said polymer notes were also more hygienic.
The Bank of England said this week that Innovia, which makes the polymer fiver, was considering “potential solutions” to the problem.
“Innovia is now working intensively with its supply chain and will keep the Bank informed on progress towards potential solutions,” it said.
The £5 note – the first to be printed on polymer by the Bank of England – was introduced in September and is likely to signal the beginning of the end for paper money.
Number 10 Downing Street took delivery of its Christmas tree yesterday, just a few days after Michelle Obama unveiled her last-ever festive decorations for the White House. Meanwhile, radio and TV adverts implore us to pop down to our local garden centre this weekend as the eight million firs and spruces that Brits will buy this season are lined up for the first major rush. But is buying a tree on 3 December too early – and also a tad vulgar?
If you think they appear to have arrived early this year, you’re right. Normally the second and third weekends of December are the major selling points. But as Christmas falls on a weekend, major retailers reckon that families will be buying this weekend, or on the weekend of the 10th, rather than waiting until the 17th.
Bah humbug? Lots of people may think so. “Flogging Christmas trees in November, or the first few days of December, is just another example of tinsel-coated crass consumerism,” says Simon Birch, a writer for Ethical Consumer magazine. “The truth is that corporate-fuelled pressure on shoppers to buy, buy, buy is both driving people into debt and putting the environment under unsustainable pressure.”
Others will say 3 December is too early because the needles will start dropping well before Christmas Day.
Retailers – and maybe it’s not surprising that they would say this – are spinning a different line: according to Wyevale Garden Centres’ tree buyer, David Mitchell, who has sourced more than 100,000 trees for the chain this year, buying in the first week of December is actually better than leaving it until later.
“All the trees are cut in the fields at roughly the same time, in the last two weeks of November.” His argument is that the sooner you buy your tree and put it into some water at home, the better. Otherwise they are just sat in stores drying out. By his logic, trees bought in early December are less likely to shed their needles by Christmas Day than ones bought later.
So what should you be buying, where, and at what price?
The British Christmas Tree Growers Association (BCTGA) says prices should be roughly the same as last year. Wyevale has held its prices for the third year, with the average 5ft-6ft tree costing around £35. But on Sunday 4 December, Aldi launches its 5ft-6ft Nordmann fir for £19.99, while Ikea is again selling its trees for £25, but you also get a £20 voucher redeemable in-store if you return between 16 January and 12 February, making the tree effectively just £5.
Taller trees, meanwhile, go for tall prices: upmarket Clifton Nursery in Maida Vale, London, is selling a 10ft Nordmann fir for £235, while John Lewis is offering a free in-store “treetorial” for those aiming to make their tree a “showstopper”. For another £200 you can buy its “full festive works” tree decorating service. Someone evidently forgot the memo about austerity Britain.
Oslo famously donates the big tree in Trafalgar Square as a grateful thank you for British support to Norway during the second world war. But according to the BCTGA, around 75% of Christmas trees are now home grown. Cheap imports from Scandinavian countries (Denmark is actually a much bigger supplier than Norway) have been hit by the falling pound, it says.
Wyevale’s Mitchell says it gets the majority of its trees from Ireland, but claims to have seen Brexit coming, so did some hedging. We don’t think he was joking. Others, however, say that massive planting of trees six to eight years ago in Denmark means it will be flooding the UK this year with cheap trees, irrespective of sterling’s decline.
Last autumn was wet and mild. This year has been ideal, say growers, with early frosts in Scotland helping to send trees into semi-hibernation. This is a good thing, experts say, as it means the trees last longer after being cut down. Frosts bring out a waxy resin on the needles that helps keep the moisture in.
Most buyers want something between 5ft and 6ft high. A four-foot-sixer can be passed off as 6ft if it has grown a long spindle, but that’s unfair on buyers, says Mitchell, who talks darkly of rival chains’ behaviour. It’s a viciously competitive market out there.
Nordmanns have conquered the market with their non-drop needles. They make up 80% of trees bought by British households, says Harry Brightwell of the BCTGA. Norway spruces, once the most popular, account for just 15% of sales.
The “new-style Swedes” are Nordmann firs that have been specially cultivated to have thinned-out branches and a lighter frame, making them easier to carry home and with more space for gifts. Other varieties such as the Fraser fir are a little pricier, but growers claim they have better “needle retention”. The Korean fir is also catching on, noted for its two-tone green and silver needles and “refreshing aroma”.
The fragrance of a real tree is why many people say they prefer them, but keep an eye out for that hardy annual tabloid headline, “Could YOU be allergic to your Christmas tree?”. Moulds that grow on trees can, it seems, trigger asthma attacks, sneezing and a runny nose, say researchers, some of whom are not even sponsored by manufacturers of hay fever remedies. It even has a name: Christmas Tree Syndrome.
Experts say that cutting half an inch off the base of your tree is a good trick to keep it looking healthy for longer. Brightwell at the BCTGA says you should ideally leave it outdoors in a large bucket filled with water for a day or two before bringing it inside. Once inside, keep it watered and place it away from radiators and open fires, which somewhat destroys the Christmas card look many try to achieve.
Most councils now offer free collection in early January so that trees are recycled. But are real Christmas trees simply a decadent waste of resources that are bad for the environment?
The Guardian wrestled with this question in 2008 pointing out that most trees are intensively farmed on an industrial scale and are typically sprayed with potent fertilisers and herbicides. As such they are hardly a haven for biodiversity.
But we also pointed out that artificial trees aren’t necessarily an eco-alternative, and are usually plastic tat produced thousands of miles away and shipped around the planet for our seasonal gratification. They will, of course, last longer, but when thrown out are not biodegradable.
Our advice was to find a tree that has been farmed sustainably – look at the Soil Association and Forest Stewardship Council sites for guidance. And try to find a tree grown close to home rather than imported from overseas.
Last week I contacted Lakeland for advice as the drive shaft kept falling out. This meant that I had to add the ingredients while the bucket was in the machine. Lakeland customer services replied the next day with the offer of a replacement machine. This arrived three days later. We are all quick to complain (rightly) when we have bad experiences, but I believe in showing my appreciation to those who provide such excellent and prompt service.
When it comes to post-purchase service Lakeland is almost in a league of its own.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Labour has committed to banning new houses being sold as leasehold, in a boost for Guardian Money’s campaign against escalating ground rents that have made some homes virtually unsaleable.
The promise, by Labour’s shadow secretary of state for housing John Healey, comes just days after the government, in answer to a question in the House of Commons, pledged to “stamp out” the abuses highlighted by us.
In recent weeks we have revealed how many buyers of new-build homes, particularly in the north-west of England, have been sold their properties on a leasehold basis rather than the traditional freehold, only to find themselves locked into spiralling ground rent demands. In some cases the rents double every 10 years, leaving households with the prospect of bills eventually reaching more than £10,000 a year. When they come to sell, they then find that mortgage lenders will no longer offer loans against their home, making it virtually worthless.
Answering a question raised by the MP Peter Bottomley, communities secretary Sajid Javid told the Commons: “We must make sure the kind of abuses he mentioned are stamped out and we will continue to do everything [we can]. We do work with a number of stakeholders and we can certainly see how we can do more.”
But Labour is promising to go further. It says it will cap ground rent charges and set out a plan to end the routine use of leasehold ownership in new housing developments. In the longer term it says ground rents could be abolished altogether.
Healey said: “Homeowners who own their home on a leasehold basis are currently unprotected from huge rises in rip-off ground rents from developers or management companies. At its worst this is little more than legalised extortion, and too many leaseholders are having to pay hefty bills as a result. Under a Labour government this sharp practice would end.”
Ground rents are a medieval relic, sadly still going in England but abolished (like leasehold itself) in much of the former empire. The Irish in particular harboured a hatred of them, seeing them as a form of serfdom imposed by absentee British aristocrats. In 1978 the Republic banned the creation of any new ground rents, while in 2004 Scotland brought in the Abolition of Feudal Tenure Act. Only in this country do new ground rents persist. We are the last colony not to rebel against our feudal landowners.
But we should not limit reforms to leasehold houses alone. The government has promised a new era of housebuilding, and in the big cities the majority of new homes will be apartments, not houses. These are routinely sold as leasehold when they should be commonhold.
Under commonhold, the individual flat buyer owns everything. There is no landlord, freeholder or lease to worry about; ownership means ownership. There is still a need, of course, to repair and maintain the property, but the flat owners choose their own property management company, eliminating many of the rip-offs that are sadly all too common.
Thing is, England already has commonhold, as it was introduced in 2002 – by Labour. But it was not obligatory, and developers just ignored it as they could make easy money from continuing with leases. It really should not be that challenging to amend the 2002 act to make all new apartments commonhold. The thornier issue is how to terminate existing leaseholds. The freeholders will seek compensation for the loss of their future income stream, but caps need to be imposed to prevent exploitation.
Meanwhile, we will continue our investigation. Which are the companies and individuals raking in the most from escalating ground rents? We would be happy to hear readers’ experiences.
Chrisopher Seddon, the 60-year-old author featured in Guardian Money last week after being falsely accused of shoplifting, has been paid a substantial sum following an outcry by readers furious at his treatment at the hands of supermarket group Waitrose.
Last week we related how Seddon was accused of stealing £102-worth of meat by a security guard at Waitrose’s Chesham branch. He was grabbed by the police, handcuffed and accused of taking the meat 17 days earlier. The guard had downloaded a shot of the alleged thief from the store’s CCTV feed.
At the time of the arrest the security guard thrust the photo of the thief in Seddon’s face, and screamed: “Do you deny this is you?”
Seddon, who was at home in north London at the time of the alleged theft, spent £9,600 on legal fees and expert reports which showed he could not have been the thief. The case was dropped the day before it was due to be heard on the advice of the Crown Prosecution Service.
Despite what he called his “scandalous” treatment, Waitrose denied liability and refused to compensate him for his losses. Instead, it offered him a £500 “goodwill payment” because he was a “valued customer”.
More than 1,100 Guardian readers commented online, and many wrote directly to Waitrose chief executive Rob Collins, to say how appallingly they thought the incident had been dealt with.
John Fitton was one reader who contacted Collins directly. He wrote: “I simply wish to state that I felt that the way in which your security guard dealt with the situation is repugnant and the manner in which Waitrose subsequently dealt with Mr Seddon reflects a miserable attitude to one of your customers.
“Waitrose customer service is one of the reasons I shop in your stores.
“However, I will no longer use them until I see a story announcing an apology to Mr Seddon for his unfair treatment and a decent offer of compensation.”
This week the company agreed to a payment, thought to be his entire losses. A confidentiality agreement means the details are secret.
A Waitrose spokesman said: “This is a complex situation involving our third-party security provider, Thames Valley Police and Waitrose. Waitrose has discussed Mr Seddon’s concerns with him further. While we believe that Waitrose has no legal obligation in this matter, we are nevertheless very sorry to hear of the distress he has experienced. Therefore, as a gesture of goodwill and with no admission of any liability, we have reached a financial agreement which Mr Seddon has indicated he is happy with.”
Meanwhile Seddon is happy the matter is over.
“Without the Guardian this outcome would not have been possible. I hope that the publicity will serve as a wake-up call to retail businesses and security firms that they cannot allow this sort of thing to happen and then attempt to shirk their responsibilities,” he said.
Households tempted by the promise of low prices if they switch to an unknown gas and electricity supplier have been warned not to run up big credit balances, in the light of the collapse of GB Energy.
Last weekend the company, which had 160,000 customers, became the first domestic energy company to cease trading since 2008. With it blaming its failure on a big jump in wholesale prices, experts are predicting it won’t be the last supplier to leave customers in the lurch this winter.
Increasingly, price comparison websites’ lists of cheapest tariffs are almost exclusively topped by names few will have heard of. In the past two years there have been a host of new entrants offering prices substantially below those charged by the big names.
Joe Malinowski, who runs price comparison website TheEnergyShop.com, says the question is not if others will follow GB Energy, but how many?”
“When switching to a smaller supplier, do your research and make sure you understand the risks. Stay clear of those that take payments in advance. Check your credit balance regularly and ask for a refund if it gets too large.”
Mark Todd, who runs rival switching site Energyhelpline.com, says no consumer should be running a credit of more than 20% of their annual consumption – but that is particularly true if they are signed up to a small firm.
Domestic energy customers can often be hundreds of pounds in credit at this time of the year, as they plan for their bills to be much higher during the peak winter period. “The spike in wholesale costs has left any firm that was not ‘forward buying’ looking very vulnerable, particularly if we have a cold winter and wholesale prices continue to rise,” says Todd. “If you’ve run up a big balance, ask for some if it back – and lower your direct debits.”
But he adds that customers who moved to an unknown firm don’t need to panic as protections have been put in place by energy regulator Ofgem to come to their aid if a supplier goes bust.
Last month it announced it had implemented a safety net to guarantee customer balances, and within three days of GB’s failure it appointed Co-operative Energy as its chosen “supplier of last resort”. This will see GB Energy customers switched en masse, and they have been assured that the Co-op will be honouring any credit balances. The company has also surprised observers by offering the same tariff terms as charged by GB Energy.
The cost of protecting the credit balances will be partly met by Co-operative Energy, with the rest being covered by Ofgem from a fund built up from a levy spread across all energy suppliers. If further suppliers fail then the same process will come into play, Ofgem has said.
Meanwhile, questions remain as to how well the switch of GB Energy customers will be managed, given that Co-operative Energy has in effect added another 75% of customers overnight. Just last month, Ofgem forced the firm to pay £1.8m compensation for customer service failings. A new IT system had left households being unable to log into their accounts, submit meter readings or check their bill – and the complaints rolled in.
“The best that can happen is that things go smoothly,” says Malinowski. “The worst doesn’t bear thinking about. If I was a GB Energy customer I would not be keeping my fingers crossed hoping for a miracle. There are cheaper and safer options with other energy suppliers. Time to switch. Seriously.”
British Gas and e.on have become the latest of the “big six” energy suppliers to say they are freezing standard gas and electricity tariffs this winter.
British Gas says the move will provide peace of mind for more than six million customers, and follows similar action by SSE, which confirmed it will cap standard household tariffs until April 2017. British Gas said the fact that it had “forward bought” its energy had allowed it to make the announcement.
However, MoneySavingExpert Martin Lewis warned consumers not to be taken in by the claim. “If you are on the British Gas standard tariff, like all big six standard tariffs you are already massively overpaying. For someone on typical use, you’re paying £1,040 a year.
“If you’re willing to change company, the savings are getting on for £180 a year at typical usage, and much more for many customers who have bigger bills. And those tariffs are one year fixed, so they’re cheaper and you’re locked in with a guarantee of no hikes for far longer,” he says.
The independent green supplier Good Energy was the first company to announce a winter price freeze back on 19 October.
I am applying for jobs as a school librarian. I hold a master’s degree in information and library studies and have seven years’ experience working as a school librarian.
The last job I applied for, I phoned before sending in my application and asked whether it would be possible to have a look around the library and to meet the librarian. The school responded quickly and I visited the following day. I was impressed with the library space and could see by the friendly behaviour of the students that the current librarian was well liked.
I sent her a thank you card after my visit and then promptly sent in my application. I was one of seven applicants, but I did not get the job.
There were a number of things we were asked to do on the day of our interview, including being interviewed by a panel of students and another with two senior members of the school. When it was my turn for the student panel, the librarian was also in the room but she did not acknowledge me. I noticed the students looked to her at one point and I would have looked, too, only it seemed rude to turn my attention away from the students. Of the seven applicants, I was rated least liked by the student panel.
Is it no longer appropriate to ask to look around a school library prior to applying to a job being advertised? Or to do what I consider essential research? My feeling is that I do not enhance my chances of being hired by doing so and that I may actually be creating an atmosphere of mistrust. I am applying for another job in a school library and would have asked to have a look around only, and perhaps meet people involved, but I don’t want to lower my chances of being chosen.
From your description of events, I find it difficult to understand how this preliminary visit to the library could have adversely affected your chances of being offered the job. You say that when you were being interviewed by the students, the librarian whom you had met before failed to acknowledge you. You seem to have interpreted this as hostility on her part but I feel certain that she was scrupulously avoiding any gesture that might have suggested to the students that, unlike the other applicants, you were already known to her. It seems to me unlikely that asking to look around a library in preparation for an interview as its librarian could create an “atmosphere of mistrust”.
I find it insensitive of them to have told you that, out of the seven applicants, the student panel rated you least liked – but this, surely, is a more likely explanation for your lack of success than your preliminary visit.
If you’ve got it into your head that looking around the library before the next interview could count against you, don’t do it.
• I don’t work in education, but when I recruit I always think highly of people who contact us first and ask lots of sensible questions. Of course, asking silly questions puts me off, so people should remember that every contact is essentially part of the interview. IsaacNewt
• I don’t think your looking around had anything to do with it. You clearly just failed the student panel. I did at one of my applications. Personally, I don’t think they are a fair test as I am one of those teachers who is not liked initially but is popular after a few months of teaching. I get good results. But because I am not a comedian or a lad, I don’t do well with student panels. Treflesg
• You are too focused on the librarian and not enough on the students. In a role like that, interacting with students is key. You can’t come last in that category and expect the job. weeblewobbler
• The internal candidate probably got the job. I don’t think much of the main criterion being whether the students like you. What is this – a beauty contest? Steve Jones
I work as a European grants manager. My position, although probably OK for the next couple of years, doesn’t have a future in post-Brexit Britain. To add to this, I don’t particularly enjoy the job and it isn’t a career I would have chosen. I studied an arts degree and took temping work in the public sector to pay the bills alongside the unpaid or poorly paid work I was doing for a small theatre company.
Nearly 10 years later, I feel stuck in this line of work, but my particular field is drying up fast and will probably end as our ties with the EU are severed. Along the way, I have had experience in project management, financial planning, communication, training, events and marketing. However, “transferable skills” seem to be a thing of the past, and the creative sector I long to work in seems to have a tightly guarded door.
Taking a pay cut isn’t really viable with my current mortgage payments, and although I have looked into getting some career coaching the costs are out of my reach and the results seem to be hit and miss.
Although you don’t particularly enjoy your job, it sounds to be reasonably secure for the next couple of years, so if you start exploring soon you will have the luxury of job-hunting without the distracting pressure of unemployment.
My advice is this: don’t give up on the creative sector just because it seems to operate behind that tightly guarded door. Ten years as a grant manager will have equipped you with experience and skills of direct relevance to many creative enterprises. But don’t just scan the job ads: use the time that you have to identify a few potential employers within the sector – chosen because they particularly appeal to you and are located conveniently. Then find out as much as you possibly can about them. If at all possible, become acquainted with people who already work there. And then, knowing a bit about their working methods, work out in what way you believe you could be of real value to them.
Go through this process with, say, three such organisations, then write each one a detailed submission of why you would love to work with them and precisely how you could help. Say that you recognise there is probably no immediate vacancy but ask them to keep your letter on file. Send gentle reminders every six months. You have every chance of finally landing the sort of job you’ve always wanted.
• People change jobs – and industries – all the time. If you have demonstrable skills and experience in the fields that you list I should think you will be a very attractive employee to a whole range of organisations. Quake42
• Life is too short to be stuck in a career you don’t enjoy. If you want to work in a creative field, just do it. You have to make change happen – it very rarely happens by accident. floaty_116
• Look beyond our borders while you still can. Rent out the house to cover the mortgage and get going. It’s surprising what a drastic change can do to one’s morale. gilstra
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
Any answers? The sound on my TV is a bit crap, so a friend suggested I get a soundbar. I know nothing about them. Are they really that much better, and how easy are they to set up for a tech numptie? Can readers recommend a good one that won’t break the bank?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
It’s the ethical Christmas gift that can throw a financial lifeline to people in poorer countries who are trying to improve their lives. Lendwithcare gift vouchers allow Britons to lend relatively small sums of money to people in 11 countries who are keen to start or grow their own small business – and the occupied Palestinian territories have now been added to the list of locations, meaning it is possible to lend money to individuals and families in the West Bank and Gaza. People such as Tayseer Ghanem, a 58-year-old farmer, and Walaa Shaltaf who runs a beauty salon.
Guardian Money has previously featured the vouchers, which for a limited time are available as a “buy one, get one free”. So if you are struggling for a present for a loved one, how about the gift that really does keep on giving? Alternatively, there are plenty of other ethical Christmas gifts for those looking for something that will transform people’s lives or help the planet (see below).
Lendwithcare is a peer-to-peer microfinance website set up by aid charity Care International UK, which fights poverty and injustice around the world. When you buy someone a Lendwithcare gift voucher, they then go online and choose an individual who they are going to lend the money to. It might be a rice farmer in Cambodia, a market stall holder in Zambia or a taxi driver in Ecuador. In most cases the voucher will be a contribution towards the total amount the entrepreneur is looking for. He or she will use the money to start or expand their small business, thereby helping them to feed their family and send their children to school.
The idea is that the loan will be repaid, and the voucher recipient can either keep the money or “recycle” it by lending it to another budding entrepreneur, and then another.
The vouchers are available in various amounts from £15 upwards and can be emailed to the recipient or printed out and tucked inside a Christmas card. Previous recipients of the vouchers have told the charity that it was one of their favourite gifts “because it gets the whole family gathered around the computer to pick an entrepreneur to help”.
Remember that these are loans, not handouts. The money is paid back – typically over anything from four to 36 months depending on the recipient’s plans for it – in instalments to the local microfinance institution (MFI) that has partnered with Care International in that country. The MFI then transfers these repayments to Care International, which credits them to the UK lender’s Lendwithcare account.
Since their launch in 2010, more than 33,000 people – many of them Guardian readers – have lent more than £11.5m to 46,400 entrepreneurs, helping people in Togo, Benin, Cambodia, Vietnam, Ecuador, Pakistan, Philippines, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Rwanda and, now, the occupied Palestinian territories.
While Care International works extensively across the Middle East, this is Lendwithcare’s first activity in the region. It has teamed up with a local MFI called Reef Finance, which operates in the West Bank and Gaza, and specialises in providing agricultural, business, housing and personal loans to individuals – typically for things such as greenhouses and livestock.
“The Palestinian territories are within a volatile region, but more than 4.4 million people live in the West Bank and Gaza and, like everywhere, they need to earn a living,” the charity says. “We believe that in helping people to increase their income and tackle poverty, they may become less vulnerable to the effects of conflict and will be in a better position to … continue with their livelihoods during peacetime, and to be more hopeful about the future.”
The amounts being sought vary. Tayseer Ghanem, for example, is seeking a loan of $2,000 (£1,600) to buy agricultural materials such as fertiliser, seeds and pesticide. A farmer all his life, the married father-of-four has a greenhouse and grows tomatoes, cucumbers, aubergines and other vegetables which he sells through a co-operative.
Walaa Shaltaf, meanwhile, is looking for a $3,000 loan (£2,400). Divorced and living with her parents, Shaltaf started working in salons 13 years ago when she finished her basic education, and recently opened her own, Beautiful All The Time. She feels she would boost her income if she offered more treatments and sold beauty products at the salon, so she plans to buy creams, cosmetics and other items, plus additional equipment. She also wants to hire an assistant.
Lendwithcare says that, as with all its MFI partners, the organisations it is working with in the occupied territories “have undergone rigorous research and are deemed to have met our stringent ethical criteria”. It adds: “Due to the elevated security situation in the region, our partners and entrepreneurs in the West Bank and Gaza undergo additional verification.” In most cases, the MFI partner there will buy and deliver the items requested by an entrepreneur and financed by Lendwithcare.
To date, only 10 Lendwithcare loans have ever defaulted – a pretty impressive statistic. In the case of five of these the individuals died, and the other five were made to groups in Malawi who lost their businesses or incurred difficulties because of severe floods.
This Christmas the charity’s buy one, get one free offer means that if you buy a gift voucher, you’ll also get a £15 voucher free (though this portion can’t be withdrawn after it is paid back).
This year’s crop of ethical Christmas gifts range from chickens and shares in a wind turbine to composting toilets for refugee camps and wash-cloths for keeping camels’ udders clean, writes Rupert Jones. The charity goat is also present and correct.
The Good Gifts website, run by the Charities Advisory Trust, has a goat for £25, or two for £45. Present Aid, which supports the work of Christian Aid, is offering a kid goat for £9 and a nanny goat for £22. Oxfam has them, too, and is offering a free milk chocolate goat with every Oxfam Unwrapped gift card order until Friday 9 December.
Some of the more offbeat gifts we found include: a kit for making banana wine, a popular drink in Malawi (£25 from Present Aid); the aforementioned wash-cloths for Kenyan camels (£15 from Good Gifts); “a pile of poo”, which is a mix of manure and organic fertiliser, plus some training in eco-friendly farming techniques (£9 from Oxfam’s online shop); and an acre of rainforest (£52 from Good Gifts – or those with deep pockets can treat someone to 25 acres for £1,300).
With some of the websites, including Present Aid, the money will go towards relevant projects rather than being used to buy that animal or item. However, sites such as Good Gifts guarantee that your money buys the described gift.
Meanwhile, the Small Wind Co-op is offering wind energy gift certificates, available in any amount from a minimum of £100. Available until 16 December, these can be exchanged for shares in the co-op which is building three wind turbines in Scotland and Wales. So far, it has attracted more than 350 members and raised more than £1.1m to fund the installation of farm-scale turbines in Wemyss Bay and Inverclyde in Scotland, and Ceredigion in Mid Wales. Projected average annual returns for shareholders are 6.5% over 20 years, says a spokeswoman.
Meanwhile, waste company London Junk is offering what it calls “the world’s first ever waste collection experience day gift package”. You might think they would pay you to get elbow-deep in the capital’s rubbish, but this comes with a £300 price-tag.
Ethical Consumer, which describes itself as the UK’s leading alternative consumer magazine, has a Christmas gift guidefor those on the hunt for present ideas. It mentions Hive.co.uk as “a great alternative to Amazon” for books, combining online shopping with support for local shops. The magazine’s best buys for perfume and aftershave include Dolma, Neal’s Yard Remedies, Florame and Pacifica. These are all vegan and not tested on animals. On the clothing front, People Tree is described as a stand-out best buy, and on the high street H&M, Marks & Spencer and New Look are all recommended.
If you are still to buy your Christmas cards this year, writes Miles Brignall, we recommend as a Guardian Money best-buy the handmade cards from Sreepur in Bangladesh, from which 100% of the purchase price goes to charity.
The Sreepur Village charity, two hours north of the country’s capital, Dhaka, cares for up to 100 destitute women and 500 abandoned children. Started 25 years ago by former British Airways flight attendant Pat Kerr, it now helps fund itself from the sale of the cards it makes. You can hand over your money safe in the knowledge that the organisation has made a real difference: in 2009 we visited the project and were so impressed that we have promoted the cards ever since. A pack of 16 costs £14.75, delivered in the UK.
At the heart of the project is a paper-making facility. Women from the local community have been trained to produce it from locally grown jute, and the cards are decorated in return for a living wage – money that makes a huge difference to their lives. British Airways flies the cards to the UK for free, while volunteers collect and distribute them here. This ensures all the money spent on the cards goes directly to Sreepur.
For more info and to buy the cards go to sreepurcards.org. Cards are sent within 24 hours of an order being placed.
UK train fares to go up by 2.3% in 2017
Time has stood still inside the lounge and two bedrooms, and you will want to give the the place an overhaul before you settle in. But lapsed planning permission allows for the large Sunday school room of this old Methodist chapel to be added to the accommodation, creating an extra storey. Price: £99,950. H&H King , 01228 810799
The pound has closed at its highest level against the euro in three months after nervous currency traders adopted a cautious approach ahead of Italy’s constitutional referendum on Sunday.
With the poll in the eurozone’s third-biggest economy too close to call, fears that a no vote would risk a fresh economic and political crisis pushed sterling to a fifth successive week of gains against the single currency, the pound’s best run in nine weeks.
The pound was up by more than half a cent against the euro to trade at just under €1.19 and was also up against the US dollar, despite a fall in unemployment.
Investor sentiment towards the pound has strengthened in recent days after the Brexit secretary, David Davis, said the UK might pay to secure future access to the European single market and nervousness grew about the outcome of the Italian vote.
Tsvetoslav Tsonev, an economist at Fathom Consulting, said: “Concerns about Italy’s constitutional referendum and its implications are weighing on markets. They are right to be concerned.
“If the outcome results in another economic downturn, causing sovereign bond yields to spike, it could prove to be the straw that broke the camel’s back, triggering a banking crisis and eventually Italy’s exit from the euro area.”
Investors in shares and bonds preferred to adopt a wait-and-see approach ahead of the Italian referendum, which supporters hope will simplify the country’s lawmaking system by reducing the authority of one of its parliamentary chambers.
Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, has said he will resign if he loses the vote, but hard evidence of public opinion has been hard to gauge because opinion polls are banned in the final two weeks before the referendum.
Shares on Milan’s stock market were barely changed on the day, with bourses in Paris and Frankfurt showing small losses. London’s FTSE 100 closed 22 points lower at 6730.72. 
The Rev Mike and the Rev Nicky-Sue Terry have the classic married couple’s habit of finishing each other’s sentences. But perhaps it’s unsurprising that they know each other’s minds so well. They are not just man and wife, but also two halves of a pioneering job-share within the Church of England, splitting the role of vicar for St Mary’s in the Hampshire village of Warsash between them.
They take turns conducting services, he chairs parish council meetings, she runs the pastoral team, and vicarage life is divided according to individual strengths, although both try to take Fridays off. Mike, who previously served in the Royal Navy, likes long-term planning; Nicky-Sue says she prefers “to get into the detail of things, which … ” – she pauses, and Mike interjects – “drives me completely barmy”. Some parishioners in distress are drawn to her, some to him, but they try to make the relationship seamless. “We have a phrase we use,” says Mike, “which is: ‘We are the vicar, we are.’”
And both are thrilled to have a way of working that suits them. Having entered the church late in life – Mike, now 60, met 54-year-old Nicky-Sue in 2007, when both were training for ordination – neither wanted to run a church full-time, and so when their bishop suggested an experimental job share, both were intrigued. “In a sense, this is the Church of England beginning to recognise that we can do things in a more flexible way, and can be responsive to a modern environment,” Mike adds. “It’s a very positive reflection on a changing world. And if the Church of England can do it, that says something.”
Thirteen years after Tony Blair’s government pushed through the legal right to request flexible working amid squeals of protest, it feels as if the last bastions of traditional working practices are finally being stormed. Change is lapping at the highest reaches of the establishment; the armed forces, parliament and the judiciary.
Next spring, a landmark report is due to be published exploring the feasibility of job-sharing for MPs, to encourage parents and disabled candidates into parliament. The Ministry of Defence is in the middle of a trial project, offering soldiers with young children the chance to defer deployment overseas or rejig chunks of leave to reduce their hours. The scheme will be opened to more service personnel from February.
Two unnamed judges recently began the high court’s first ever job-share, and last week it emerged that future vacancies on the supreme court will be open to flexible applications in the hope of attracting female judges. (Currently the ratio is one woman to 11 men.)
The next big leap in the story, says the Fawcett Society’s chief executive Sam Smethers, would be moving to a default assumption that every job can be made flexible in some way – early starts or finishes, home working, part-time work or job-sharing – unless there is good reason not to. But that means showing it can work even at the top, and in professions once stoutly resistant to change.
“It’s about opening minds and realising that a lot of the way we do things is just because we’ve always done it that way,” she adds, “not because that’s the way it has to be done. In most jobs there is some prospect of flexible working.”
The niggling question, however, is how firmly these painstaking gains for working parents are entrenched in workplace culture: there are fears that, in a potentially tougher economic climate post-Brexit, it might become too easy to roll back employment rights. This is why it is so intriguing that even professions granted exemption from the law are now voluntarily thinking the previously unthinkable.
The single biggest reason for leaving the armed forces, according to the annual Armed Forces Continuous Attitude Survey, is the impact on family life – and it’s not just affecting women. There is growing concern about promising male officers leaving in their 30s and early 40s, just as experience becomes invaluable, because of the toll taken on marriages and children. It is this prospect of troops voting with their feet that has prompted a rethink of the rigid patterns of army life.
If the role of military wives was once to stay at home raising children while their men were off at war, those days are long gone. Almost one in 10 soldiers is now female, many military spouses work, and too many struggle to fit that around their soldier’s long absences and unpredictable hours. In a recent survey for the Army Families Federation (AFF), which has campaigned for flexible working on forces families’ behalves, 39% of spouses said their partner couldn’t help with childcare even occasionally. (For soldiers not on active deployment, variable start times and other forms of flexibility may be be available, but the forces are exempt from the legal right to request).
“You can’t rely on your soldier to finish at fixed times. They’re away a lot and the burden of the childcare absolutely falls on the spouses,” explains Louise Simpson, policy and research director at the AFF, and an army wife herself.
“If you talk to an organisation like Recruit for Spouses, which helps military spouses return to work, they’re trying to place people who were in incredible jobs [before becoming] military spouses, who are now downsizing considerably and finding even that difficult. Employers look at their CVs and say: ‘Oh, we can’t have someone this highly qualified.’” Yet many spouses can’t afford, she says, not to work.
Simpson praises the army’s current chief of general staff, General Sir Nick Carter, who personally backed the flexible working experiment last year by declaring there was “absolutely no reason” for not changing parade times on a base so that soldiers could do the school run. Tiny changes could, Simpson says, make a big difference.
But the Ministry of Defence remains cautious about the impact on operational readiness to deploy. The trial will continue until at least 2019 before any final decision is taken.
Meanwhile, the AFF argues that more could be done to spread the message that modern couples both work and need to share the domestic load. “We need to educate our command that this is the way most people operate now, so if every now and then a soldier wants to leave at 4pm to pick up the kids, they could,” says Simpson. But there is some private anxiety about the consequences of taking up the offer: one new mother Simpson talked to recently said her soldier husband wouldn’t take up the scheme because he worried that “it would be an end to the fast track”. For both civilian and military parents, the key may be making sure that flexibility goes right to the top of the tree.
At first glance, judges make terrible candidates for part-time working, since the same judge must sit continuously through trials that can last weeks. But the crown court now has a handful of part-timers, working in blocks of several weeks on and several weeks off – and the supreme court’s cases are shorter and more predictable than criminal trials, which makes them potentially more amenable to part-timers if they were carefully matched to cases. A final decision has yet to be taken on what kind of hours will be accepted, but crucially, candidates won’t have to declare that they want to work flexibly unless they are short-listed, meaning their CVs should be sifted purely on merit.
Since most supreme court justices are in their late 50s and 60s, the changes are unlikely to attract new mothers, but could suit someone seeking reduced hours because they are caring for an elderly parent, or to see teenagers through A-levels. And more than that, it sends a powerful signal through the system. “What we’re saying is that, actually, we appreciate people are looking to us to take the lead,” said a spokesman for the supreme court.
What kind of boss denies women the legal right to maternity leave, requires them to commute hundreds of miles a week and calls them lazy if they complain? The answer, technically, is all of us. MPs are not legally employees, but servants of the people, and the people can be unforgiving bosses. Ironically, the law on working life is currently made by people whose working conditions would be illegal almost anywhere else.
The Labour MP Rachel Reeves has just written a biography of the pioneering Labour minister Alice Bacon, Alice in Westminster, in which she reflects on how life has changed for female politicians since Alice’s election in 1945. “The hours have massively changed, the through-the-night sittings that existed in her day – the latest I’ve been there is maybe 1.30am,” says Reeves, who has two children under three years old. “There’s a nursery now, whereas when Alice was an MP very few women had children. There was a feeling you couldn’t have both. Those are choices that women are much less willing to make now.”
But the flipside of afternoon and evening sittings was that some MPs in Alice’s day treated parliament as a part-time job, pursuing careers in law or the City during the day. Time could be interestingly elastic, if what you wanted was the freedom to make money, not the freedom to see your children.
And while back then established MPs might have deigned to visit their constituency only once a year, the weekly shuttle back and forth is the bane of many modern political parents’ lives. Since there’s no way around the need to live in two places at once without breaking the constituency link, there is growing interest in job-sharing, with two candidates standing for parliament on one ticket and dividing the work between them.
Two Green activists, Sarah Cope and Clare Phipps, brought an unsuccessful court case last year arguing they should be allowed to stand for parliament as a job-share, and this week the Green MP Caroline Lucas – who shares her own party’s leadership with Jonathan Bartley – once again backed the idea.
But it remains controversial, dividing even those passionate about opening up parliament. Reeves thinks ministerial posts could be shared relatively easily, but worries about how an MP job-share would cope if its two halves disagreed over an unexpected issue, such as the vote on bombing Syria: “For me, that was an incredibly difficult decision. I had friends who politically I’m very close to who voted the other way. I’m not sure how you agree that in advance. Do you just say: ‘Well, it’s a Wednesday, so that’s Rachel’s day to vote?’ That doesn’t feel right. I personally think it’s incredibly difficult.”
Nonetheless, two academics, Bristol University’s Prof Sarah Childs – author of a separate recent report on diversifying the Commons, currently being studied by a working group of MPs – and Birkbeck University’s Dr Rosie Campbell, are examining the practical challenges for a report due next spring.
The urgent priority for many in Westminster, however, remains dragging arrangements for new parents into the 21st century. Ministers have been able to take maternity leave since 2001, but new mothers still have no formal right to time off constituency work. Most muddle through, reliant on the goodwill of whips to excuse them from voting at Westminster, while braced for criticism over their temporarily patchy presence. Reeves recalls signing casework shortly after her second child was born last June, and resuming constituency surgeries within six weeks. Despite being signed off Westminster votes for four months, she turned up to vote on Syria and tax credit cuts. “I was never completely off,” she says, before adding hastily, “but I’m sure that’s true for people in other jobs as well.”
Why don’t MPs complain more about conditions most parents wouldn’t tolerate? Reeves snorts incredulously at the question: “Because you get no sympathy!” Besides, she says, there’s flexibility in the school holidays when MPs work from their constituencies. “I don’t think we have loads to complain about. We’re a bit like self-employed people, who can’t take maternity leave because it’s going to cost you.”
The snail’s pace of reform in parliament undoubtedly reflects private fears of a backlash from voters still smarting over the expenses scandal. But Childs remains optimistic about the prospects for change, arguing that it is in nobody’s interest if MPs “have to rely on good relations with the whips” to get time off to recover from childbirth.
She is struck, too, by the way the wave of SNP MPs elected in 2015 are starting to change the dynamic. Used to the more modern Scottish parliament, which keeps something closer to office hours, she says they are much more willing to question stuffier traditions: “They’re able to make comparisons, and they look around and say: ‘Why are we doing this the way we do?’”
And as the two vicars of St Mary’s found out, that can be a life-changing question. “When we started, it was an experiment; we had no sense that we would do what we do now,” says Nicky-Sue, who thinks a job share might never have occurred to them without their bishop’s prompting. “But there’s something very symbolic about it, a married couple sharing a post like this. It’s perhaps a challenging concept. But it’s a beautiful one.”
What’s going for it? I have deeply etched childhood memories of Rye. We came here often, Mum and Dad perhaps harbouring fantasies of moving to its medieval streets when we won the pools. Now I come here often, accompanied by much the same vain hopes. In the intervening four decades, little has altered, bar the arrival of boutique hotels, boutique cinemas and better coffee. Rye, after all, has been around the block and seen it all before, even unruly, egocentric demagogues striding across the globe. (This was once a command centre against Napoleon’s potential invasion.) You’d think Rye’s prettiness would be its undoing. But no. Even the annual deluge of summer tourists fails to dent its astonishing character. This is a town, though, best approached in winter, hunkered down, hatches battened against the maritime gusts, with the sun low over Camber Sands and a flaming log or two in the fireplace at the George.
The case against Read the Mapp & Lucia novels. Occasional tweeness. A few too many gift shops. Preserved, but when a place looks this good…
Well connected? Trains: Hastings (18 mins), Ashford (22 mins), Eastbourne (44 mins) and Brighton (1hr 25 mins); changing at Ashford, you can be at London St Pancras in 1hr 23 mins. Driving: tricky; the A259 coast road is twisty and busy; 30 mins to Hastings, or Ashford and the M20.
Schools Primaries: Rye Community and nearby St Michael’s CofE are “good”, Ofsted says. Secondaries: Rye College is “good”.
Hang out at… The delightful new cinema, the Kino, followed by a snifter at the George or Ypres Castle. Lots of choice for dinner, from the Ambrette to the Landgate to fish and chips.
Where to buy Anywhere you can. Caught between marshes and the Weald, Rye huddles tightly round its hilltop. Everywhere is lovely, though the A259 circling the town can get cloggy, with consequences for the houses lining it. There are few opportunities for sprawling suburbans; a few around Military Road or Playden. Rye Harbour is worth a look, too. Large detacheds and town houses, £500,000-£1.4m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £350,000-£500,000. Semis, £240,000-£450,000. Terraces and cottages, £200,000-£350,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £700pcm; a three-bedroom house, £1,100pcm.
Bargain of the week I’ll race you for this one. Listed, two-bedroom terrace house, needing modernisation, £265,000 with Phillips & Stubbs, phillipsandstubbs.co.uk.
Phil Law “A welcoming haven for writers and creatives, but it’s impossible to buy anything useful as it’s all coffee shops and chintz.”
• Do you live in Rye? Join the debate below.
Live in Streatham, south London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 6 December.
The Dorchester’s leaked list of grooming rules for female staff could open up the luxury hotel to lawsuits filed by current and former employees, critics have said.
A set of grooming demands was this week reported to have been emailed by hotel managers to employees after the five-star establishment received complaints about the general hygiene of its staff.
According to the leak, women were asked not to turn up for work with oily skin, bad breath or garish makeup. They were also encouraged to shave their legs, ensure their fingernails were manicured and avoid body odour.
Kiran Daurka, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said dress codes were lawful when they related directly to the requirements of a job, but could be challenged when they encouraged the objectification of staff.
“I would have concerns where a policy seemingly objectifies women by asking them to look a certain way which has no bearing on their ability to do a job,” she told the Guardian. “For example, hair removal is clearly about objectification and sexualisation, as there is some ideal of what a woman should look like.
“This may also unlawfully offend the religious or other beliefs of women whose belief system does not allow the removal of hair.
“A dress code that treats women less favourably than men is discriminatory. But even where a policy is applied to all, it may still particularly disadvantage women, and that disadvantage would need to be objectively justified.”
An unnamed employee told the Daily Mail: “It’s disgusting. This list is like something out of the dark ages and downright offensive. It’s not as though you choose to have oily skin, and a lot of women, especially teenagers, cannot help it – no facial wash or moisturiser in the world can control that.
“The women are all pretty livid but worry that if they complain – or rebel and turn up to work with chipped, dirty nails and hairy legs, for example – they’ll be sacked on the spot.”
Philip Landau, an employment lawyer from Landau Law, said there were many reasons why an employer may want to have a dress code or appearance policy, such as to communicate a professional and corporate image. However, “an employer’s policy must not be discriminatory in respect of the protected characteristics in the 2010 Equality Act for age, disability, gender reassignment, religion or belief, sex, or sexual orientation”, he said.
“Accordingly, any dress code or appearance policy should apply to both men and women equally. The codes do not have to be identical, as there will clearly be different requirements for male staff, but it does have to amount to similar standards. It is not clear what the equivalent grooming policy is for male staff at the Dorchester.
“A grooming policy should also be reasonable and proportionate in nature, with particular reference to the work that is being carried out. If it isn’t, and you are dismissed for failing to comply with the code, you may have a claim for direct discrimination on the grounds of sex if there has been a detriment for one gender over the other. You may also have a claim for unfair dismissal.”
Landau said employers needed to “tread carefully” in case they were seen to indirectly discriminate against an employee. The requirement not to display any excess body hair, including on the face, could discriminate against those with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), of which one of the main symptoms is excess androgen – high levels of “male hormones” in the body.
“This may cause physical signs, such as excess facial or body hair, and therefore a blanket policy of no facial hair could amount to indirect discrimination on the grounds of disability and sex,” he said.
Ewa Jasiewicz, a union organiser for hotel workers in London, said she believed the stipulations left workers open to discrimination, especially if they were transgender or gender fluid. “Gender is a protected characteristic under the Equality Act and this includes gender presentation and reassignment,” Jasiewicz said.
“Women workers at the Dorchester do not enjoy transparency on where their service charge goes and do not have fair tips or [a] living wage, but are expected to spend money on manicures? This beggars belief. This in my opinion is a form of paternalistic, sexist, gendered taxation on an already exploited and underpaid female workforce.”
The Unite regional officer Dave Turnbull said: “People of different ethnic backgrounds may not be able to comply with the requirements due to their skin or hair type.
“It is possible that there is an underlying race issue here, as we are often told by members that hotels do try to avoid having black people in front-of-house position and it could easily be interpreted that the Dorchester are trying to get female staff to conform to a certain type.
“Also there are religions where the removal of facial hair may not be acceptable. There may be disability issues linked to this as well, for example skin conditions or allergies to certain types of makeup.”
To apply these standards only to female staff would be clearly sexist, he said. “It treats women workers as if they are part of the product that is being sold by the hotel and can place staff at risk of sexual harassment and comments from customers who might view them as a commodity.”
Workers in the Dorchester and other hotels were on low basic pay and often reliant on variable elements, such as tips or service charges, to top up their earnings, Turnbull said. “The cost of makeup, beauty treatments and compliance with dress code requirements can be extremely expensive and is never factored in by an additional allowance of any sort. Again, this could easily place employers at risk of claims of sex discrimination, as male employees are not expected to shoulder the same expenses.”
An employee at another London hotel, who asked to remain anonymous, said she was subjected to similar rules. She told the Guardian her main issue was that female employees had to wear tight dresses, which was “unfair and impractical” for her waitressing job. It also opened her up to unwanted comments from colleagues and guests. “If I’m cleaning a table, male workers will say things like: ‘Oh, stay right there,’” she said.
While the rules do not stipulate that the waitress must remove any facial hair, the 24-year-old, employed by a boutique hotel frequented by wealthy clients, said she had to wear skin-coloured tights rather than black ones, which meant having to shave her legs regularly, and that there was an expectation to look attractive. “We’re told that we have to dress as if we’re on our first date,” she said.
Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said it was completely unacceptable for any woman to be told what she should wear and how she should look. “Employers should concentrate on what enables people to do a good job and what drives productivity. This is 2016, not 1970; we need to see an end to this kind of objectification of women,” she said.
The Dorchester said the rules were not emailed to all staff, but were provided to job applicants. The hotel’s general manager, Roland Fasel, said: “The Dorchester has a proud community of employees who uphold world-leading hospitality standards, including grooming, in line with many other brands.
“All new applicants, both men and women, are sent a copy of our grooming standards in advance of interview.”
The number of homes in Spain sold to British buyers has slumped since the Brexit vote and the fall in the value of the pound.
Sales in the third quarter of this year declined 16% after steadily increasing since 2011. Last year the strong pound led British buyers to purchase almost 10,000 Spanish properties, up 42% on 2014, giving them a 21% share of the number of homes acquired by international buyers.
No other nationality buys as much property in Spain as the British, and in recent years they have made a significant contribution to the recovery of the Spanish property market.
About 28% of holiday homes on the Costa del Sol are sold to Britons and 26% on the Costa Blanca. They also dominate the sales of holiday homes in Murcia, the Canary Islands and the Balearics.
“We have carried out a survey of the sector and it appears that house purchases by Brits on the Costa del Sol and the Costa Blanca have fallen by around 50% since the referendum,” said Mark Stucklin, of the Second-Home and Resort Industry Observatory.
“At first it was the uncertainty after the Brexit vote, and then the fall in the pound,” said Catriona Hogan, marketing director at yourVIVA, a holiday homes estate agent on the Costa del Sol.
“About 40% of our clients are British and we’ve seen that drop to around 30%. There’s still a lot of interest but there’s a wait-and-see attitude as people are watching to see what happens with the pound. Things are picking up a little now.”
Stucklin pointed out that the market had always closely mirrored the fluctuation in the pound-to-euro exchange rate. The pound is currently down 18% compared with the end of 2015.
“When the pound fell below €1.20, from 2009-13, Britons bought fewer than 5,000 homes a year compared [with] nearly 10,000 in 2015,” he said.
“If the trend continues it will have a significant impact on the Costa Brava and Costa Blanca markets, among others.
“While demand from other countries such as Germany, Belgium, Sweden and France is growing, in the short term it’s not enough to make up for the lost British buyers.”
The 2.3% average UK rail fare rises for 2017 are being driven by much higher increases on the reprivatised Virgin Trains East Coast, where ticket prices set by the operator will far outstrip the rate of inflation.
While regulated fares such as season tickets and off-peak returns, which are set by the government, are to increase by 1.9%, fares on Virgin Trains East Coast will increase by 4.9% overall.
The rail firm said that would be hiking the fares it controls by an average of around 5.5%.
An off-peak single from London to Edinburgh on the east coast line, which now costs £128.20, will be £137.20 – 7% more – in January, while a London-to-Newcastle single also goes up 7% to £131.70.
Virgin will also be raising the average train fares it controls on its west coast intercity service from London to Manchester and Glasgow, with overall fares rising by 2.4%.
Fares will also rise by an average of 2.4% on First Group’s Great Western Railway. The German-owned Arriva has not responded to confirm the overall fare rises on its franchises, but some long-distance anytime fares on its Cross Country appear to be rising sharply: for example Bristol to Darlington will be 4.8% more expensive, at £149 for a single.
On some franchises, such as Govia Thameslink Railway – including Southern – Southeastern, Greater Anglia and National Express’s C2C, fares set by the operator will actually slightly trail the government’s increase next year, with average fares rising by 1.8% on each. East Midland and South West fares will rise by 1.5%. First’s TransPennine Express said it would freeze advance fares, meaning an overall rise of 1.4%.
Virgin said it was tackling “historic anomalies” and would be making 10,000 more discounted advance fares available every week on the east coast line for those booking ahead. It said that despite the 2017 rises, “standard anytime” tickets on long distance journeys were still 4% cheaper than when Virgin Trains took over the franchise in March 2015.
However, it has already been accused of making several “stealth hikes” to fares – including removing some of the cheapest advance fares in the first few months after it took over the franchise.
The rail firm – a partnership between Richard Branson’s Virgin and the transport group Stagecoach – won the franchise in March 2015, when it was controversially reprivatised by the coalition government after more than five years of operation in the public sector.
Passenger numbers have not risen in line with projections from the time of the bid, leaving the operator struggling to meet the £3.3bn in premiums it has promised to pay the Treasury by 2023, with the bulk of that due in the later years of the eight-year franchise. 
David Horne, the Virgin Trains managing director on the east coast route, said: “The changes we’re making on 1 January will see more advance fares available, making it easier for those that can book ahead to grab a bargain.”
Train fares across Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% from January, according to figures released by the industry body, the Rail Delivery Group. 
Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport condemned the increase, warning that some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.
She said: “Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5%, and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give them a truly affordable railway.”
Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the service they pay for.
“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the payments train companies make to government.”
But Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, the train drivers’ union, said: “It is scandalous that the government is allowing the privatised train companies to make even more money for providing an ever poorer service. This new price hike – well above the rate of inflation – is indefensible.”
Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said Labour was committed to returning franchises to public ownership to “put an end to Britain’s rip-off railways”. He added: “Passengers are told that higher fares are necessary to fund investment, but vital projects have been delayed by years. Rail fares have risen by 25% on average in the last six years alone, whilst real wages remain below their 2008 levels.
“Money that could be used to keep fares down or reinvested to improve our services is instead subsidising the profits of private companies and other nations’ railway systems – it’s a scandal.”
Train fares in Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% next year, the rail industry has announced. The figure is the average increase across all rail tickets and will take effect from 2 January.
Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport condemned the increase, warning that some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.
She said: “The train operating companies and the government need to work closely together to provide fairer, simpler and cheaper fares making sure people are always sold the cheapest ticket available.
“Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5% and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give them a truly affordable railway.”
Etkind accused the government of dragging its feet over the introduction of flexible season tickets with “fair discounts” for the 8 million part-time workers across the UK.
“It is not right that part-time workers have to buy expensive one-off tickets, or season tickets, which they then waste on the days they don’t work,” she said.
Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the service they pay for.
“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the payments train companies make to government.
“This money helps government to support the biggest investment in our railway since Victorian times.”
Mick Cash, the general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, said the announcement was “another kick in the teeth for British passengers”, adding that travellers in the UK paid some of the highest fares in Europe “to travel on rammed out and unreliable trains”.
“Once again the rip-off private train companies are laughing all the way to the bank as they whack up fares and axe staff in all-out dash to maximise their profits,” Cash said. “This culture of private greed on Britain’s railways has to stop and RMT will step up the fight for a publicly owned railway where services and safety are the priority, not corporate profits.”
Alongside the fares announcement, the government said that some of Southern rail’s long-suffering passengers in the south of England would be repaid the equivalent of a month’s travel.
More than 84,000 passengers will be compensated to recognise the huge number of delays, cancellations and disruption on the network in recent months. The chaos has partly been caused by strikes over changes to the role of conductors and high levels of staff sickness.
Season ticket holders will be able to claim a refund for the equivalent of a month’s travel. Passengers with an annual ticket will be able to claim the one-off payout against their 2016 ticket, and it can be paid directly into their bank account.
Customers claiming against quarterly, monthly or weekly tickets must have bought travel for at least 12 weeks between 24 April and 31 December to be eligible.
The government said GTR, the parent company of Southern, had the details of most season ticket holders and would be inviting them to log on to a website to claim compensation. The company will also be able to consider proof of purchase from people claiming a payout who have not previously registered.
The rail minister Paul Maynard said: “Getting Southern rail services back on track is a priority for the government and I know that what passengers want most is a reliable service. But when things do go wrong it is right that we compensate people who have not had the service that they deserve. This is a gesture in recognition of the problems people have faced.
“We’re working hard to get Network Rail and Southern to improve this network and get this railway working the way people expect. We are investing record amounts in improving our railways and we need everyone in the rail industry, including the unions, to work together to deliver for passengers.”
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
After many years working for the same large company in a technical capacity on a small team, the management has finally formalised my job spec and advertised the role. I applied for it along with a more junior colleague.
Although I have vast experience and I have been doing this job for nearly 30 years, the post was given to my colleague. There are lots of possible reasons – he is cheaper, toes the line (unlike me), interviewed better. (No surprise, as this was my first interview for 30 years!)
I get on very well with my colleague and do not grudge him the job one bit, but I am in a dilemma. He regularly comes to me for help and advice as he does not have my technical experience. How do I proceed now he has been promoted above me? Do I say “sorry but I can no longer offer the help I have in the past”, or do I continue to help him and simply lump the fact that he is getting remuneration off my back?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
You could simply sit and imagine the singin’ in the wire. You could also try to persuade the planners to let you upgrade it into a minute home, office or, with that large window, an artist’s studio. If only you could reverse the estate agent’s charges. Guide price: £25,000. Finest Properties , 01430 843013
The Australian pioneer of the polymer bank note says it’s “stupid” that vegetarian and vegans are protesting in the UK about the five pound polymer note containing animal fat.
Professor David Solomon says the polymer notes contain trivial amounts of tallow, an animal fat found in candles and soap, yet pressure is being placed on the Bank of England to find an alternative.
“It’s stupid. It’s absolutely stupid,” Solomon told the Australian radio station 2GB. “There’s trivial amounts of it in there.”
More than 120,000 people have supported an online petition urging the Bank of England to cease using animal fat in the production of five pound notes – the first polymer notes in circulation in the UK.
“The new STG5 notes contain animal fat in the form of tallow. This is unacceptable to millions of vegans, vegetarians, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and others in the UK,” the petition states.
“We demand that you cease to use animal products in the production of currency that we have to use.”
Solomon said polymer notes were extremely hard to forge and had a lot more benefits for the consumer than previous paper notes.
“It picks up less drugs than paper notes and you don’t chop down trees,” he said. “It’s more hygenic than a paper note by a long way.”
The $10 note was the first polymer bank note in circulation in Australia in 1988.
The note was developed by the country’s research and development body, CSIRO, led by a team under Solomon.
Buy to let landlords are scrambling to avoid the impact of tax changes that come into effect next year, a report has found.
The Buy to Let Britain report found landlords were restructuring their portfolios to escape higher taxes on their rental income, which will be phased in from April 2017. Some landlords have set up limited companies, it said, while others have increased rents or transferred properties to family members.
The report, compiled by mortgage lender Kent Reliance, also found that the average rent in Great Britain has hit a record high of £881 a month, and landlords indicated they intended to raise prices by an average of 5.4% – the equivalent of £571 a year for households.
It also revealed strong house price growth has pushed the value of rented accommodation in the UK to £1.3tn, up by 16% in the last year to September. 
The buy-to-let tax changes, which were unsuccessfully opposed in court by landlords represented by Cherie Booth, were introduced in the 2015 budget to level the playing field for owner-occupiers and investors. At the time the then chancellor George Osborne said buy-to-let landlords had a “huge advantage” over homebuyers. “And the better off the landlord, the more tax relief they get,” he added.
Currently, landlords can offset their entire mortgage interest costs against the rent they get from a property before they declare an income, but over the next four years that will be changed so that by 2021 just 20% of the interest will be subject to tax relief.
Kent Reliance said an increasing number of landlords were holding their properties in limited companies, which are not subject to the same taxes. In the first nine months of this year, 100,000 limited company loans were taken out by landlords buying properties, it said – double the number for all of 2015. In March, as purchases soared ahead of a new higher rate of stamp duty on second homes, 20,500 of the loans were taken out.
The lender said demand for this type of arrangement was likely to grow “as the tax changes bite”, and could account for two-thirds of buy-to-let loans in 2017. A survey of 900 landlords found that 11% had already incorporated, or had moved holdings to a lower-rate tax-paying spouse or partner. A further 25% were considering making one of those changes.
The bad news for tenants is that landlords are also considering raising rents to make up for lost income. A third of those questioned said they expected to hike rents in the next six months, with two-thirds of them blaming the tax change.
Andy Golding, chief executive of OneSavings Bank, which owns Kent Reliance, said: “The stamp duty levy clearly took its toll on the market, and combined with the forthcoming tax changes, landlords have felt at the mercy of a political agenda. But confidence is returning as landlords take action to limit the damage to their finances. The use of limited companies is soaring, and rents are increasing, even after one of the biggest surges in rental supply in recent history.”
Golding said the measures, which were designed to help aspiring owner-occupiers, would achieve the opposite. “We have warned all along that the tax changes will push up rents, and this is already starting to happen,” he said. “Only through a substantive and long-term building programme across all tenures will we see an end to escalating house prices and rents.”
David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London & Country said there were advantages to using a limited company to buy property, but landlords should consider the implications. “You cannot just transfer a property into a company – you have to sell it to the company and that could trigger other costs,” he said. “While corporation tax is low, you do have to think about things like how you will get your income out of the company.”
Hollingworth said the structure was unlikely to help anyone with just one or two buy-to-let properties.
The Residential Landlords Association (RLA) said its research had found that 40% of landlords had considered switching to limited company status, but that four in five had decided it was unsuitable.
Andrew Goodacre, RLA chief executive, said such a move was positive for new properties only.
He said: “Ultimately though, we need to encourage landlords to develop new properties whatever status. That is why the RLA believes the mortgage interest changes should apply only to new borrowing and that the stamp duty levy should not apply where a landlord invests in property that adds to the net supply of housing.”
Also, ‘simpler’ train fares planned; an innocent man handcuffed in Waitrose; and what next for GB energy customers
Many football clubs in the UK have liability insurance that covers them for claims from victims of child sex abuse, which has resulted in payouts. As the scandal continues to engulf the sport, insurers have pledged to improve the compensation process.
Police reported on Thursday that 350 people have now come forward to report attacks and, as the scope of inquiries grows, the role of insurance companies has come under the spotlight.
The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said: “Recent revelations regarding abuse in football are very distressing and at the heart of it are the victims and survivors who have been abused.
“The insurance industry is fully engaged with the current independent inquiry and has submitted constructive suggestions about how the civil justice compensation process could be improved.”
Patrick Collinson, the editor of Guardian Money, notes that major clubs take out combined employers’ and public liability policies, which collectively covers a huge range of eventualities, including allegations of sexual assault.
He says: “The public liability part covers the club for claims when, say, a fan is hurt in the stadium. The employers’ element covers claims relating to members of staff. One major insurer said there were circumstances, such as the allegations of sexual assault, in which claims could possibly be made against the employer’s liability, and a payment be made, and such a payment could be subject to a non-disclosure agreement.”
On Wednesday it emerged that Chelsea sanctioned a compensation payment at boardroom level to a former youth team player who approached the club to complain about abuse at the hands of the club’s former chief scout, Eddie Heath, who worked at the club between 1968 and 1979. Heath died in the late 1980s. The compensation was offered without an acceptance of liability.
Collinson added: “Legally speaking, any employer, such as a football club, can be held liable for personal injuries inflicted by a member of their staff, where the employee’s actions have been carried out during the course of their employment.
“Ultimately, if the employer is held to be liable, then the victim can make a personal injury claim which will then be covered by the club’s employer’s liability insurance.”
The ABI statement continued: “Compensation paid by an organisation to a victim could be covered by liability insurance. As part of the settlement process, confidentiality clauses are sometimes requested by victims or the organisation insured. They are not part of the insurance contract and we are not aware of any insurers who currently request them.”
An 89-year-old has found a job after placing an advert in his local paper asking for part-time work to stop him “dying of boredom”. Joe Bartley, from Paignton, south Devon, is due to start work at a cafe in the town after the owners of the family-run business spotted his request.
“No matter what your age or your background, you deserve a chance,” said Cantina Bar and Kitchen’s co-owner Sarah Martin. “Most people have got something to offer and Joe is someone who is keen, who is putting himself out there. What is not to like about that?
“A lot of people who come here don’t just come for coffee, they come for a chat, so Joe is perfect.”
Bartley, who was a member of the 6th Airborne division and served in Palestine after the second world war, put an advert in the Herald Express twice last month. It read: “Senior citizen, 89, seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”
He said he had been overwhelmed by the response to the advert, which he described as “not unusual, just an old guy looking for work”, adding: “The owner phoned me and said she was interested, and asked me to come in. So I arrived at the cafe and we’ve had a bit of a chat with the owner, and shook hands.”
Bartley said he was amused at the fact that the advert had made him something of a local celebrity, and said he was looking forward to earning his own money to enable him to pay rent. “I can’t believe it really, I feel great about it,” he said.
He said he had lived alone since his wife, Cassandra, died two years ago, and had been lonely. “When you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into that flat it’s like solitary confinement,” he said.
His new hospitality role was not the only job offer he got after taking the initiative. Glenn Rodgers, an independent baker in Barnstable, north Devon, offered the pensioner a job after reading his story in the Guardian. “I’m a baker and even though it’s not complicated, it’s therapeutic, it’s quite a soulful thing to do – and I thought I’d offer him a job.”
But the bakery, The Ginger Breadman, being in Barnstaple, was too far for Bartley to travel. Rodgers said he wanted the pensioner to know he had been offered a job in the hope that it would put a “smile on his face”. More employers should think about taking on older staff, he added. “It’s unjust otherwise. Why not give him a chance? Also it works both ways, employers are getting experienced reliable staff who really want to work.”
Bartley will get a lift to work with his new employer on Sunday, but will take a bus the rest of the week. “He is delighted, and we are looking forward to it,” said Martin. “We think about these things all the time. We are never going to be rich, but we like to give something back, so when we saw the advert there was no question – the minute we saw it we knew we’d give him a job.”
The media regulator is to investigate why telephone landline prices have risen so fast amid concerns that the elderly and vulnerable are being adversely affected by price hikes.
All major landline providers had increased line-rental charges by between 28% and 41% in recent years, in spite of the wholesale cost of providing those landlines falling by 25%, said Ofcom.
Market leaders BT and Virgin Media had the highest line-rental charges, with TalkTalk and Sky not far behind, Ofcom said. The price increases were felt most acutely by customers with a standalone landline service – those who do not have broadband or a pay-TV deal.
Last year, the Guardian highlighted the steep rise in landline charges in recent years that has massively outstripped inflation. UK consumers were found to be paying about 50% more for landlines than counterparts in Europe.
The telecoms firms have increased landline prices – BT’s is now £18.99/month – in part to offset declining revenues elsewhere. Telecoms customers now make far fewer voice calls on their landline as they rely on their mobiles or social media. However, they generally need a landline at home if they want to access fixed-line broadband.
Ofcom’s competition group director, Jonathan Oxley, said: “Our evidence shows that landline providers have been raising the price of line rental, even as their costs have been coming down.
“We’re particularly concerned for older and vulnerable customers, who rely on their landline and are less likely to change provider. So we’re reviewing this market to ensure these customers are protected and getting value for money,” he said.
Ofcom found that elderly and vulnerable people, who make up a significant proportion of standalone landline customers in the UK, were particularly affected by price rises.
The government’s digital minister, Matt Hancock, has welcomed the investigation. “Landlines are an essential service for thousands of households across the country, but especially for elderly and vulnerable people who are more reliant on their home phones. The government is clear that action should be taken where consumers are not getting a good deal, which is why we are launching a green paper next year to examine markets that are not working fairly,” he said.
A spokesperson for BT said: “We already offer a number of products that represent significant savings on standard line rental. For example, our home phone saver product, and for vulnerable customers our BT Basic service, which costs just £5.10 per month. We will engage fully in the industry consultation.”
Virgin Media said it was launching a new “Talk Protected” plan, which freezes line rental at £17.99/month for its older and disabled customers who rely on their landline the most.
A firm that sells Christmas cards based on pupils’ artwork to raise funds for schools has gone out of business in the busiest period of the year.
Schoolcardshop sold personalised cards and gifts through schools to pupils’ families and others. A message on its website said its Edinburgh-based parent company, Dynamic Colour, was no longer trading.
In an email to customers, seen by BBC Scotland, the Schoolcardshop team said it would not be able to produce this year’s products as Dynamic Colour was in the process of appointing a liquidator.
The BBC reported that the email said: “This has come as a shock to all of us and we’ve been trying hard to bring operations to a clean conclusion. Unfortunately, due to the situation we find ourselves in we are unable to continue in any form.”
It added: “We are sorry that all participating children and parents will not now receive their cards and gifts, but the matter is completely out of our control.”
Schoolcardshop’s website says it has been providing schools with “extremely high-quality printed products to help with their fundraising initiatives” for nearly 10 years. It allowed families to create and personalise cards, while schools retained a proportion of the money spent by families on the products.
Other products printed by the company included drawing books, gift labels, mugs and T-shirts.
The brief update on the Schoolcardshop website stated: “Please note that Dynamic Colour (Schoolcardshop’s parent company) is no longer trading. Further details will be available here in due course.”
No one was available to comment at Dynamic Colour.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
Government promises to stamp out abuses of new-build ground rent
Plans for ‘simpler, more modern’ UK train fare system to be announced
Handcuffed in Waitrose: the innocent man in search of justice
GWR fails to deliver on the final cost of online special offer rail tickets
Calling John Lewis about my Partnership card ... is there anybody out there?
Parcel Monkey delivers customs duty bill to Filipino children instead of gift
Budget utility provider GB energy has folded. Miles Brignall looks at what happens next for gas and electricity customers.
Get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from moneycorp, providers of the Guardian money transfer service, provided by Moneycorp.
Save time and money with the Guardian’s annual travel insurance, provided by Voyager.
A quarter of London homes listed on Airbnb were rented for more than 90 days last year, many illegally and in breach of an act intended to stop landlords turning badly needed housing into unofficial hotels. The booming homesharing website admitted on Thursday that 4,938 of its “entire home” London listings – 23% of the total – were let out for for three months or more, despite a law requiring anyone doing so to apply for planning permission.
The San Francisco-based website published an independent report into its activities by the thinktank IPPR that concluded: “It is likely there are many cases where planning permission for a change of use has not been obtained.”
The report warned that Airbnb and other homesharing sites are causing landlords to remove properties from the already stretched private rented sector and placing them into short-term lets in a trend that poses “potential future risks to housing supply in London”.
Airbnb announced on Thursday that from next spring it will ban hosts in London from renting out entire homes for more than 90 days a year without official consent.
“The problem was that a website that was about people making a little money letting out rooms was being abused by professional landlords turning their properties into hotels by the back door,” said Tom Copley, Labour’s housing spokesman on the London assembly, who campaigned for the change.
He said it adversely impacted on the already squeezed housing supply in the capital and affected local communities, with people in some areas complaining of Airbnb guests coming and going at all times.
It was already against the law for property owners to let out their homes on short term, hotel-style lets without planning permission, if the total letting period was over 90 days per year. But, according to Copley, town halls did not have the resources or data to enforce it.
Sarah Hayward, leader of the London Borough of Camden, welcomed the ban. “Swathes of properties in Camden had effectively been removed from the longer-term rental market, making it both more expensive and difficult to find a longer-term rental property in the borough for those working here,” she said. “It was abundantly clear to all councils involved that many users of the site were flouting the 90-night limit, and the simplest way to stop that was for Airbnb to stop it at source.”
In a letter to hosts sent on Thursday, Airbnb said: “We want to help ensure that home-sharing grows responsibly and sustainably, and makes London’s communities stronger. That is why we are introducing a change to our platform that will create new and automated limits to help ensure that entire home listings in London are not shared for more than 90 days a year, unless hosts confirm that they have permission to share their space more frequently.
“The new measures will begin from 2017. If you want to host more often, you will need to certify that you have permission to do so or apply for the relevant permissions from your local council.”
In March, Airbnb said London was the third biggest city in terms of places to stay, with a little over 40,000 places, and that this was growing at a rate of 75% per year.
“I welcome this move,” Copley said. “Airbnb have engaged constructively since I raised this with the mayor a couple of months ago. I now call on other short-term letting websites to do the same.”
Airbnb, which has been valued at $25bn (£20bn) and helps let out 3m properties around the world, has faced a regulatory backlash in some cities where leaders have grown concerned about its impact on housing supply.
Berlin levies a €100,000 (£85,000) fine for anyone renting out more than half of their home for less than two months without a permit, while hosts in San Francisco who do not register with the city authorities can be fined up to $1,000 per day. In New York there are strict laws against short lets in apartment blocks if hosts are not staying the apartments at the same time as their Airbnb guests.
“While independent research shows that home-sharing has no significant impact on housing affordability in London, we believe it’s important to take action against unwelcome commercial operators who have no place on our platform,” Airbnb told hosts.
British Gas has become the second leading energy supplier to freeze its standard prices this winter.
The company, the UK’s biggest energy firm, said the move would bring some peace of mind to more than 6 million customers. But consumer organisations said energy companies needed to do more than just freeze prices and warned that price rises of up to 10% were likely after the end of the winter.
Two weeks ago SSE, one of Britain’s “big six” energy suppliers, froze its standard tariffs, putting pressure on rivals to follow suit. Wholesale gas and electricity prices have risen sharply since June, prompting some smaller energy firms to raise their prices. Many bigger companies have already bought gas and electricity for delivery during the winter at lower prices.
In a Christmas message, British Gas said it was keeping the price of its standard variable energy tariff unchanged through this winter. A spokeswoman said prices had been frozen until at least the end of March. The company has also launched a deal that allows households to fix their energy prices for three winters, until March 2019.
Its standard variable energy tariff paid by direct debit is £1,044 – £40 more than its cheapest deal, a one-year fix at £1,004.
Consumer organisations gave a guarded response. Citizens Advice welcomed the winter price freezes from British Gas and SEE, and called on other big energy firms to follow suit.
Joe Malinowski, of TheEnergyShop.com, said: “That’s not a big deal, it’s only a few months. It’s a nice gesture but, call me cynical, the already expensive standard tariffs are going to stay expensive for this winter.”
Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, agreed, saying: “Energy customers on the standard tariff are already paying a premium – their bills are as much as £380 more than for those on cheaper fixed deals.”
Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said the huge increase in wholesale prices and the weaker pound would soon enough affect household bills. “Come the end of winter, expect to see hikes of up to 10% by many of the big six companies,” he added.
Consumer organisations urged energy companies and the government to take further action. Guy said: “It’s also important that the government looks at a more permanent way to bring down costs for people on the standard tariff. One way to do this would be to automatically switch low-income customers who have been on the standard tariff for years to a cheaper deal.”
The chief executive of British Gas, Mark Hodges, sought to address concerns by making a “commitment that all British Gas customers will always get access to our best deals”. He promised an annual health check for customers on the standard rate to ensure they are on the right tariff.
There has been mounting criticism from politicians about the treatment of loyal customers by the large energy firms. When the business secretary, Greg Clark, met representatives from the industry earlier this month, he vowed to take action to ensure it treats customers properly.
A recent report commissioned by industry lobby group Energy UK showed it cost the big six energy companies £844 to provide dual fuel this year. But the average household bill was more than £1,000, according to campaign group BigDeal.com.
Theresa May used her Conservative party conference speech in October to criticise the high number of customers on standard contracts, saying: “It’s just not right that two-thirds of energy customers are stuck on the most expensive tariffs.”
Alex Neill, the managing director of home and legal services at consumer group Which?, said: “While it’s welcome that another big energy supplier is freezing its standard tariff prices, these are generally the most expensive deals on the market and customers should look to see if they can switch to a better deal.”
Petrol prices in Britain are set to rise after the Saudi-led Opec cartel agreed its first production cut in eight years, sending the price of oil surging.
This could push up petrol prices by as much as 9p a litre, adding almost £5 to the cost of filling up an average family car, according to motoring organisations. Higher oil prices could also push up household energy bills as wholesale gas prices tend to track the price of crude.
Opec, whose 14 members pump a third of the world’s oil, announced at a meeting in Vienna on Wednesday that it would trim production by 1.2m barrels a day to 32.5m from 1 January. Russia, the largest non-Opec producer, has also agreed to reduce its output gradually.
The news sent Brent crude, the global benchmark, 8% higher to more than $50 a barrel. Brent rose a further 0.6% to $52.42 a barrel on Thursday, trading around a six-week high, while New York crude climbed over $50 a barrel for the first time since the end of October.
The AA estimates that a rise in crude oil prices to $60 a barrel would push petrol prices including VAT up 9p a litre to about 123p a litre. That is £4.95 extra a tank and £18 extra a month for a family with two petrol cars – just as winter sets in and cars use more fuel to power heaters and lights.
Luke Bosdet, a spokesman for the AA, said: “Not only is this the fourth jump to $50 a barrel so far this year, but it also comes at the wrong time. With winter motoring cars consume more fuel.”
Changes in oil prices feed through to petrol prices after 10 to 14 days. Bosdet deplored that oil prices were driven more by “feverish speculation” than actual changes to production. He added: “The only silver lining is that oil hasn’t taken off massively.”
RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams said oil prices would rise further in coming days and weeks, “likely pushing pump prices up in the short term, but it is what happens into 2017 that will be most important in determining if the days of relatively low prices of fuel that drivers have benefited from this year are coming to an end”.
Petrol prices dropped sharply in early 2016 to about 100p a litre when oil plummeted to below $27 a barrel, amid an oil glut. Iran ramped up production after international sanctions on the country were lifted.
At present, fuel prices average 114.16p for unleaded and 116.36p for diesel, according to website PetrolPrices.com.
Williams noted that the sterling-dollar exchange rate was also crucial – as oil is traded in dollars a weaker pound can push prices in the UK up, as has happened since the Brexit vote in late June.
Annual house price growth has slowed to the lowest rate in 10 months, according to an index.
Property values increased by 4.4% year on year in November, the weakest annual growth since January when there was also a 4.4% increase, figures from Nationwide Building Society showed.
House prices edged up by 0.1% month on month in November, following a 0% change in October, taking the average property value across the UK to £204,947.
Despite the slowdown, Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said the latest increase is in line with growth rates seen since early 2015. In October, an annual increase of 4.6% was recorded.
Gardner said: “There are some signs that, despite the uncertain economic outlook, demand conditions have strengthened a little in recent months, reflecting the impact of solid labour market conditions and historically low borrowing costs. Mortgage approvals increased in October, and surveyors report that new buyer inquiries have increased modestly.
“The relatively low number of homes on the market and modest rates of housing construction are likely to keep the demand/supply balance fairly tight in the quarters ahead, even if economic conditions weaken, as most forecasters expect.”
Gardner pointed to data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders showing the popularity of fixed mortgage rates as borrowers lock into ultra-low-rate deals.
He said: “Data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders suggests that over 90% of new mortgages were contracted on fixed rates over the past 12 months. This may be driven by a desire to lock in record low interest rates.
“The proportion of new mortgage lending contracted on fixed rates has increased considerably since the low point in 2010, when less than half of lending was on fixed rates. In recent years, the proportion of lending accounted for by fixed-rate deals has persisted at levels well above those prevailing before the financial crisis.
“Fixed-rate deals are most popular amongst first-time buyers for whom certainty over monthly payments is likely to be particularly important. Indeed, over the past 12 months 95% of new mortgage lending to first-time buyers was on fixed rates.”
Gardner said the average rates on fixed-rate deals have edged down in recent years, adding: “For borrowers with a 10% deposit, two-year fixed rates are currently the lowest on record, at 2.42%.”
Jeremy Leaf, a north London estate agent and a former residential chairman of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), said the housing market tends to slow down in the run-up to Christmas.
He said the figures “reflect the struggle between those trying to take advantage of very low interest rates and softening house prices versus those showing caution in view of the economic and political uncertainty. The result is modest house price increases mainly because of the continuing shortage of supply”.
Howard Archer, chief UK and European economist at IHS Global Insight, said: “House prices look likely to rise modestly in the near term.
“However, we suspect that house prices will come under increasing pressure as 2017 progresses and may edge down over the year, possibly by around 2%.”
Archer said a lack of homes on the market would help to keep prices up.
Q I’ve recently turned 20 years old and I’ve taken a year out from my degree course to get some industry experience, and I’ve also been saving up. I haven’t got enough to invest in an amazing property, but I do think my savings will go some way in helping me get my foot on the ladder.
I’ve always wanted to get into property development as something which I would do on top of the job I hope to have after I graduate.
I’d quite like to start right now but I’m not sure how likely I am to get a mortgage at my age and as a student. I don’t know whether I should wait until I’ve graduated and got a well-paying job.
I’ve had a look at some properties and I think I’ve found a few that look promising. I’d probably go for a buy-to-let so I have a constant income – but how much of this do I actually get after tax?
Do I have to have some sort of experience as a landlord before I’m likely to be lent money? How would I go about getting a mortgage: are there different types? I’ve tried researching this but I still don’t know if I’m deemed as ‘too young’ to start in the property market. HK
A The building opposite me is owned by a landlord who used his student loan to put down the deposit on the first of his now multiple buy-to-let properties. That was about 10 years ago, when lending rules were less strict but, in theory, a student is as eligible to take out a buy-to-let mortgage as anyone else. Nor is age a barrier (unless you’re in your 70s or 80s) as most buy-to-let mortgages are available to 18-year-olds.
You choice may be more limited than that of other buyers. Some lenders won’t accept applications from people aged under 21 or 25. The fact that you don’t already have a mortgage on another property is also a bit of a no-no for some but there are around 20 lenders (out of the 76 listed by Moneyfacts) who will look at applications from first-time buy-to-let buyers.
Whether any application is successful will depend on whether the figures add up. The first stumbling block is the size of the deposit you are able to put down on a property. Unless it is at least 25% of the lender’s valuation of the property, it won’t be impossible to get a buy-to-let mortgage but your choice of lenders will be limited to two. For those two, you’ll need a deposit of 20%.
Then there’s the question of rental income. While a handful of lenders look at both earned and rental income, the majority base their lending decision on rental income only. The catch is that most lenders expect the rental income you get from the property to cover the monthly mortgage repayments by 125%. So, if your mortgage costs £1,000 a month, the monthly rent will have to be £1,250. However, new lending rules and tax changes due to come into force from 2017 will push up this “rental coverage” rate to 145%.
Even if you managed to get a mortgage, buy a property and find a tenant, how much money you make from your investment depends on all your other costs. To answer your specific question, what you actually get is whatever your tenant(s) pay you. But you’ll have to use that money to pay the mortgage, fund the various insurances you need to buy and pay for the necessary safety tests, as well as the cost of any maintenance work at the property. You will also have to pay tax on your rental income.
At the moment, you can deduct the costs mentioned from the rental income before arriving at the amount that is taxable. So, if you receive £15,000 a year (£1,250 a month) but spend, say, £12,000 on mortgage interest and £1,000 on other stuff connected to the property, you would pay tax on only £2,000. However, from April 2017, a new system is being phased in which, by 2021, will mean that you can deduct only 20% of the cost of mortgage interest. Using the same example as before, this would mean being taxed on £11,600 of the rental income rather than £2,000. This significant change to the taxation of rental income has caused the National Landlords Association to forecast that in 2017 around half a million buy-to-let flats will be put up for sale.
Of course, while you are a student and/or in the process of finding a post-graduate job – and so probably not earning enough to pay tax – you won’t have to worry about a tax bill, although you will still have to report your rental income to HM Revenue & Customs.
The supplier of the new plastic £5 notes has been forced into a rethink after vegan and vegetarian campaigners complained that animal fat was used during the note’s production process.
After coming in for criticism earlier this week over the use of the derivative, known as tallow, in the polymer note, the Bank of England said on Wednesday that it was “aware of some people’s concerns” and that it would treat them with the “utmost respect”.
The Bank said it was in talks with the supplier, Innovia, which was looking at “potential solutions”. In a statement released on Wednesday, it said: “This issue has only just come to light, and the Bank did not know about it when the contract was signed.
“Information recently provided by our supplier, Innovia, and its supply chain shows that an extremely small amount of tallow is used in an early stage of the production process of polymer pellets, which are then used to create the base substrate for the £5 note.
“Innovia is now working intensively with its supply chain and will keep the Bank informed on progress towards potential solutions.”
The note, the first from the Bank of England to be printed on polymer – though not the UK’s first – was introduced in September and is seen by many as heralding the beginning of the end for paper money.
There was fury among vegetarians and vegans following confirmation by the Bank that the notes contained tallow. 
Doug Maw, who started a petition against its use, said he was “disgusted” a more suitable alternative had not been sourced. The 47-year-old hotel worker from Keswick in Cumbria, said: “There is no excuse for it. There has got to be other ways of making money without using animal products.” 
More than 110,000 people have since signed the petition.
Manager demoted for failing to bow to Korean boss, UK tribunal told
Dave Ogilvy is, as he says, not your average 63-year-old. The UberX driver works up to 85 hours per week and has just about finished saving for his retirement, which will be spent snowboarding around the world with the woman he plans to make his third wife.
Ogilvy started driving for ride-sharing company 10 months ago after his sales career hit a wall. He had been operating as a “middle man”, providing goods for large retailers and then found himself without a business when his customers decided to negotiate directly with manufacturers.
“I couldn’t find the right thing to do. I had three years of a pretty bad financial situation,” he says.
A friend introduced him to the idea of driving for Uber, he rented a car through Splend (which hires cars and does hire-purchase deals for Uber drivers) and now he loves the freedom, the variety and the income of his new venture.
Ogilvy says he never felt discriminated against in the job market because of his age: “If I tell people I am 49, they believe me.”
Others in his age group are not so fortunate. It takes an average of 116 weeks for over 55s to re-enter the workforce and there are more people over 50 on work-for-the-dole schemes (despite the fact it is not a requirement for them) than there are unemployed people under 22.
While employers are making efforts to become more inclusive in their hiring practises, outside of the large financial institutions, mature-age workers still lack the kind of champions that benefit women in the workforce – as in the Male Champions of Change group set up by the former sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick and the Workplace Gender Equality Agency.
While employers may publicise their efforts to retain the older workers they already have, rarely do we hear about over 55s being specifically targeted as new recruits.
Around 27% of people over the age of 50 report experiencing age discrimination at work, according to the Australian Human Rights Commission’s Willing to Work inquiry report, released in May 2016.
In the corporate world, there is cachet in being seen to be encouraging women in leadership and fighting racial and cultural discrimination, but advocating for mature-age workers is yet to find its place in the sun, says the managing partner of PwC’s People Business, Jon Williams.
“In the social debate, this is not a sexy thing to be seen to be doing,” he says. “They ought to be proud about it. It is not about hiring them as a last resort, it is about hiring them because they have qualities that other age groups don’t necessarily have – whether it’s experience or empathy or their willingness to let others succeed or their ability to look after themselves.”
Bias against older workers has a wide-ranging economic impact. PwC’s Golden Age Index reports that harnessing the power of that workforce could deliver Australia economic gains of up to $78bn.
The chief executive of Splend, Chris King, says Dave Ogilvy is a good example of the benefits of age and experience. “He has one of the highest Uber ratings across Australia, and his earnings are sensational,” says King.
And King has the metrics to prove it. Splend use telematics to rank its 900 drivers on their safely based on speed, acceleration, breaking and cornering.
“We find a lot of drivers are in their 60s, retired businessmen, and they don’t do it for the money. A lot of the time it is social interaction and just getting out of the house,” he says.
King says drivers in the over-50 age range get higher ratings from customers, are more patient and friendly, less stressed and safer on the roads. “The feedback we get from surveys and our staff, they are awesome,” he adds.
Williams says it also makes sense from a business point of view to have workplaces mirror the demographic of the populations they serve, especially since baby boomers (aged 52 to 70) have plenty of money to spend.
This is exactly what the Commonwealth Bank is doing in a six-month trial to hire more mature-age workers into the two call centres that deal with superannuation, investment and retirement products for Colonial First State.
The percentage of workers over 55 across the bank is 7.2%, compared with 16% of Australia’s total labour force.
When the trial period ends, the bank will assess its success in terms of customer satisfaction and employee retention. If the results are promising, the bank will then consider proactively hiring over 55s across other business areas.
Westpac was one of the first Australian organisations to focus on recruiting mature-age people, setting a target to increase the number of employees aged 50 and over to more than 20.5% by 2017. By early 2015 Westpac had reached 20.9%. The bank was also the first corporate to introduce grandparental leave.
Family-owned Bus Queensland is another company that goes out of its way to employ mature-age workers. Because a large proportion of its work is school bus runs, the company found it hard in the past to retain younger drivers who needed an income over school holiday periods.
The human resources manager for the company, John Muir, says the split shifts and plentiful holidays can suit older workers, and the company has managed to attract drivers with a wide range of experience.
The company employs 400 drivers and at least 60% are older than 50 and some are over 70. Muir says drivers have included engineers, accountants and even a retired judge who took on a minibus run for children with special needs.
“They make a decision they want to do something different in life and think: ‘I’ll go and drive a bus for a while’,” he says.
Bus Queensland is taking part in the Department of Employment’s Corporate Champions initiative, which is for employers who make a public commitment to hire mature-age workers. Here’s hoping more companies get on board.
Katie Allen poses three crucial questions on how to improve Britain’s productivity (The road to greater productivity is via pay and flexibility, 28 November). Namely how it links in with low pay, how it interacts with working hours, and what it tells us about the importance of staff taking ownership of their work.
I have put a proposal to the government that sets out to cover each of these points. I have proposed a network of public employment services, driven locally by Jobcentre Plus and sustained by City Deal funding, with the specific aim of helping low-paid workers to climb the earnings ladder and craft their jobs to match their skills and circumstances.
Its main benefit to workers would be the provision by a dedicated caseworker of information, advice and guidance, as part of a clear and agreed contract which is aimed at helping them earn more money and improve their working lives – be it through altering their hours, negotiating a pay increase, taking advantage of local childcare services or discounts on public transport, gaining specialist skills, or finding work elsewhere for which their circumstances are better suited.
The government’s own in-work service is currently being piloted among a limited group of universal credit claimants only. To help solve the productivity puzzle in which our country finds itself, a more comprehensive offer is required to help change the nature of low-paid work.
Frank Field MP
Labour, Birkenhead
• Philip Hammond says that in the real world a German worker takes four days to make what we make in five. This is a heavy burden to put on to a metric that is just one big number (GDP) divided by another (workers). It is like saying that people have on average 1.99 legs, ie technically true perhaps, but quite hard to find an example and not very helpful.
Given the same tools and the same task, I’m sure a British worker is just as productive as a German one. What brings our average productivity down is a higher proportion of people in low-paid work, and a long-term failure to invest in capital equipment. Proper sectoral analysis is required, not eye-catching headlines which just make us feel inadequate to the modern world.
Whether it is right to reward the worker for making more widgets by using a better machine is a different question – perhaps the return on capital should go to the business owner. But while you can always mothball an underperforming factory, at a national level you can’t just mothball a workforce. Even Henry Ford knew he needed paying customers to buy his cars.
Tim Grollman
London
• Productivity in the UK car industry matches or exceeds the best elsewhere in Europe. Productivity while selecting parcels in a warehouse would be much lower due to the large number of people employed on zero-hours contracts, which will still have to be taken into account when calculating productivity. Crudely average the two and you have a misleading view of the UK economy. Only by analysing the economy sector by sector will we identify where attention is needed, either by better training or legislation to outlaw poor employment practices. 
Richard Bull
Woodbridge, Suffolk
• Gaby Hinsliff is wrong (The golden generation should enjoy the luxury of being useful while it can, 25 November). Many retired people wonder how they ever had time for work. I recall that, over 30 years ago, predictions of a “leisured age” led to the view that society should prepare for a reduced working week. Recent articles (eg Just about managing? In these towns that’s a dream, Aditya Chakrabortty, 22 November) and diminishing opportunities for even skilled work suggest, in respect of work, the predictions were correct. Yet there is increased necessity for employment. Both partners in a family work to make ends meet, pension age is increasing, people resort to spurious “self-employment”, and graduates undertake unpaid internships. What went wrong?
The cause is concentration of the benefit from automation into the hands of the elite. Business heads’ rewards are disproportionate to their workforce.
Shared more equally, the need for full-time work should diminish. Equalisation in pay levels, coupled with redistributive taxes, could allow provision of a basic income sufficient to permit a shorter working week. The old-age pension could disappear. Anyone could continue working at occupations they enjoy, or which are their own rewards, but financial reward should not be the principal stimulus for any undertaking. Pay differentials and “capitalist” methods of earning could remain, but rewards would be appropriately taxed so that no one was forced into full-time employment. What creativity might be unleashed.
Utopian? Perhaps, but to avoid the conflict predicted by George Monbiot (Trump’s climate denial is just one of the forces that point us towards war, 23 November) we must reverse the present “survival of the richest” and reduce the need to work in order to live.
Ian King
Westbury-on-Severn, Gloucestershire
• In the 1970s there was considerable discussion about what society should do to cater for all the “leisure time” that would arise when repetitive processes were automated and made more efficient. However, in that age of the welfare state and fairer taxation it was assumed that the benefits of automation would be to a significant extent shared.
However, along came Thatcher and Reagan with authoritarian monetarist economics (which in an Orwellian misuse of language is now referred to as “liberal economics”), and in particular the tax race to the bottom so that, as technological advance means we have become much more efficient at producing the goods and food we need, the benefits have been retained by an ever decreasing minority, while the incomes of the majority have stagnated, or even regressed, for the last 40 years.
With an ever smaller workforce required to produce the products we need, unless we can reverse the trend back to redistributive taxation, and accept that not everyone can contribute directly to material wealth creation (but still want and need a good share of that wealth), I think George Monbiot’s prediction that we are heading towards major conflict is almost inevitable.
Graham Dean
Wellington, Somerset
• If there is going to be less employment in those areas where robots will replace manpower, can someone explain our governments’ arguments for more immigrants to do “the jobs we don’t want to do”. There is a contradiction here. If this doomsday theory is right, encouraging the arrival of immigrants from other parts of the world can only lead to a nightmare scenario of more people turning to extremist parties, social problems and social unrest when jobs and homes go.
Peter Fieldman
Paris, France
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Your report (28 November) tells us yet again that there is a gender pay gap issue, identifies sectors and areas with seemingly the biggest disparities, and reminds us that the problem is likely to take 60 years to sort out.
Whatever reports are produced, and whatever entreaties are made, the gender pay gap will never go away unless and until something is done to change matters. Well-researched, thought-through proposals have been put to employers and governments. Some good experiments have been conducted, notably the women-only training programmes between 2006 and 2010, which on a shoestring budget skilled and/or retrained more than 25,000 women across a variety of sectors. Schools should separate girls and boys for the Stem suite of subjects, allowing girls to study in the ways proven to be more suitable to them. Employers should introduce positive action programmes which would identify and bring forward women with the capacity and the desire to move on and up.
None of this costs a fortune, but it does require determination and the political will to see change now.
Margaret Prosser
Labour, House of Lords
• At the elite level of women’s football in England – the Women’s Super League – there are many players who would be happy with the equivalent of “$1,000 and $2,000 a month” (Low wages, threats, late payment – football’s non-elite underbelly, Sport, 29 November). Some of them almost play for free. Why? Partly the FA’s ludicrous funding model (a soft cap on spending of 40% of revenue) and partly the extent to which some teams linked to the men’s Premier League receive huge financial support. Small teams – for example, newly promoted Yeovil and Bristol Academy – receive little funding.
John Bird
Bristol
• Your article (Pay squeeze will be the longest in 70 years, 25 November) says how workers have seen a decade without real earning growth. It does not mention the non-workers who are still doing very well for themselves: MPs up 1.3% in 2016 after the 10% increase in 2015; high court judges up 12%-15%; top executive pay up by 10%. We need to be kept aware of the widening pay gap to legitimately direct our anger away from the Jams (“just about managing”) and the scroungers towards the MQNTYs (“managing quite nicely, thank you”), who maintain their power while increasing their income.
Anne Strachan
Manchester
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
When is a snowflake not a snowflake? Answer: when it has fourfold symmetry, like the graphic used with your article (Poor little snowflake, G2, 29 October). How could you make such a mistake? If you are determined to include a snowflake graphic, please get it right. Your snowflakes appear to be made of cubic ice, a metastable polymorph not seen in blizzards or snowballs. An interesting idea but sadly a fantasy. Regular bog-standard ice comprises a hexagonal array of water molecules, so snowflakes likewise have sixfold symmetry. You silly snowflakes!
Roger Davey
Chester
• Young people’s need for “safe spaces” is completely understandable. I’m quite old now but still need mine: it’s my bedroom, usually with a favourite book and a cat. But speakers’ platforms and debating chambers are intended as verbal battlegrounds and have no business being anybody’s safe space.
Jan Chamier 
London
• Here’s a revolutionary idea from Jeremy Hunt (Apprentice nurses without degrees to learn job on wards, 30 November). Roll back 50 years and that’s what student nurses were doing, I was one of them. It would be interesting to know if patients’ mortality rate improved when this practice was replaced by insisting nurses get a degree first.
Sarah Akhtar
Stoke-on-Trent
• The Brexit aide’s notes mention having cake, eating it and “French likely to be most difficult” (Caught on camera, G2, 30 November). Understandable really, they’ve got history with cake.
Terri Green
Langley, Warwickshire
• I was encouraged to read that scientists reported that playing tennis can result in a 47% reduced risk of death (Report, 30 November). I had always worried that it was 100% – new balls please!
Murray Marshall
Salisbury
• Apparently the new fivers are 20% pony and 1% monkey (Petition calls for end to animal fat in plastic £5, 30 November).
Alasdair McKee
Lancaster
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
A financial manager at a UK branch of a Korean firm lost her job because she refused to bow to her boss, an employment tribunal has heard.
Misook McDonald, 43, claims she was demoted to secretarial duties after the perceived slight and is suing Dongbu Daewoo Electronics for sex discrimination, age discrimination and racial discrimination.
The tribunal in Reading, Berkshire, heard that she was moved after the chief financial director angrily confronted her over her failure to bow to him at the start and end of each working day.
She said that when she challenged Ho Seung Yoo about having to make the coffee in her new job, he replied: “Isn’t that what female workers should do?”
McDonald, who has an English father and South Korean mother, claims she was stripped of her managerial role because she was not a white British man.
The electronic sales company, which has a base in Winnersh Triangle, Berkshire, and Ho deny the claims.
McDonald returned to work as a part-time assistant finance manager in April 2014 after a career break to have two children.
She was promoted to finance manager and head of human resources, reporting directly to Ho, despite having no experience in HR, and began working full-time in February last year.
She claimed that as the only bilingual Korean and English speaker in the company, she had been highly valued, but when “a better-speaking Korean employee came along, I was not his preferred choice. I am also not considered ‘pure’ as my father is English.
“I expressed that I felt discriminated just because I am viewed as a Korean female and younger, hence lower in status that I can be looked down upon and pushed aside,” she said.
McDonald was signed off work with stress and told the company’s managing director, Choong Sik Park, in August that she was being harassed by Ho.
“He said Mr Yoo was very angry that I had broken protocol by not bowing to him every morning when I get to work and I do not bow to him when I leave the office at night,” she said.
Ho denied he had demanded McDonald bow to him, but when asked about the coffee comments he replied: “Yes I did say it. However, although I asked her to make some coffee for my guests, I was really sorry for asking that of her at the time.”
Did you sleep well last night? If you didn’t, are you aware of the consequences? Sure, you feel a bit foggy-brained, but there’s more to it than that. According to research by the thinktank Rand Europe, sleep deprivation costs the UK economy £40bn a year. In the US, the estimated cost of poor sleep is US$411bn.
But how can lack of sleep be quantified? “We built an economic model that simulates the real economies of those countries,” says Marco Hafner, the Rand report’s lead author. “Then we looked at three effects. One is mortality, because people who regularly sleep fewer than six hours a day have a 13% greater chance of dying at any point. That has a negative effect on the economy, because those people are then not in the workplace,” he says. Hang on, don’t they just get replaced? “Yes, but that can be costly, because new people are not as effective.”
Hafner got the idea for the research after he became a father. He realised he was driving to work, but not really understanding how he got there; sitting in the office, but not really functioning. Somewhere in that brain fog (and this raises a counter-question about the effect of sleeplessness on creativity), he thought: “Why has no one thought about how we can measure sleep?” The semi-functioning state he describes accounts for the biggest cost of sleeplessness: productivity. The third and final cost is the negative impact on lifetime earnings of young people who lack sleep.
So, what can be done to help workers sleep better? Some companies already offer nap rooms or nap pods – such as the Huffington Post, Uber, Google, Ben & Jerry’s and PricewaterhouseCoopers – but they are a long way from commonplace and beyond the means of most employers. Other aides to alertness include canteen menus that offer healthy food and regulating the temperature of the office, a topic explored in a Cornell University study of the effect of temperature on productivity.
Office design is increasingly blurring the lines between work and leisure. The proliferation of table tennis tables, foosball tables, massage chairs, indoor mini-golf courses, pot plants and kitchen and lounge areas suggests that employers want to make the workplace so comfortable, so much like home, that people almost forget to leave. All of this is designed to increase productivity, of course. But if increased productivity relies upon longer working hours, which lead to less sleep, which itself generates an economic cost, who is to say which cost or benefit is greater?
“We spend lots of time on our smartphones; that exposes you to a lot of blue light, which is bad for your levels of melatonin,” Hafner says. He suggests a curfew after which employees are not expected to respond to emails.
“Sleep is a public-health issue,” he says. “Make sleep like smoking. There are smoking cessation programs. But not many companies care about sleep in that way.”
After all, we spend about a third of our lives sleeping or trying to sleep. It would be nice to excel at it.
Younger generations are being told to prepare to wait even longer for their pensions, with former minister Steve Webb suggesting that the retirement age for a state pension will rise to 70.
I can understand why some policymakers seeking to cut the costs of state support for pensioners are attracted to the idea of continually raising pension ages, but I believe this is potentially damaging to certain social groups.
The justification for such an increase is based on forecasts of rising average life expectancy. But just using average life expectancy as a yardstick ignores significant differences in longevity across British society. For example, people living in less affluent areas, or who had lower paid or more physically demanding careers, or started work straight from school, have a higher probability of dying younger. Continually increasing state pension ages, and making such workers wait longer for pension payments to start, prolongs significant social disadvantage.
The state pension qualification criteria depend on national insurance contributions. Normally, workers and their employers make contributions that can amount to around 25% of their earnings. Even now, a significant minority of the population does not live to state pension age, or dies very soon thereafter, despite having paid significant sums into the system. By raising the state pension age, based on rising average life expectancy, this social inequality is compounded.
Increasing the state pension age is a blunt instrument. A stark cutoff fails to recognise the needs of millions of people who will be physically unable to keep working to the age of 70, because of particular circumstances in their working life, their current health, or environmental and social factors that negatively impact on specific regions of the country.
State pension unfairness is even greater, because those who are healthy and wealthy enough can already get much larger state pensions than others who cannot afford to wait. If you can delay starting your state pension until 70 – assuming you either have a good private income or are able to keep working – the new state pension will pay over £200 a week. But if you are very ill, caring for relatives, or for whatever reason cannot keep working up to state pension age (now 65 for men and between 63 and 64 for women) you get nothing at all.
In fact, just reforming state pensions is not the best way to cope with an ageing population. It is important to rethink retirement too. Those who can and want to work longer could boost their own lifetime incomes and future pensions, and also the spending power of the economy and national output, if more were done to facilitate and encourage later life working. Having more older workers in the economy, especially given the demographics of the western world, is a win-win for all of us. Even a few years of part-time work, before full-time retirement, can benefit individuals and the economy. But this should not be achieved by forcing everyone to wait longer for a state pension and ignoring the needs of those groups who cannot do so.
There is no provision, for example, for an ill-health early state pension, or for people to start state pensions sooner at a reduced rate. Politicians have entirely ducked this question but such a system would acknowledge the differences across society. There are, surely, more creative and equitable ways of managing state pension costs for an increasingly ageing population, using parameters other than just the starting age.
Indeed, raising state pension ages has already caused huge hardship to many women born in the 1950s. These women believed their state pension would start at 60, but many discovered only recently they will need to wait until 66. Many women have no other later life income, therefore they are totally dependent on their state pension.
Rather than just considering increasing the pension age, the government could consider having a range of ages, instead of one stark chronological cutoff. Allowing people an early-access pension, possibly reflecting a longer working life or poorer health, could alleviate some of the unfairness inherent in the current system. Increasing the number of years required to qualify for full pensions could also help.
Raising the state pension age is rather a crude measure for managing old-age support in the 21st century.
Women dominate the upper reaches of Forbes magazine’s list of the highest-paid musicians of 2016. Four of the top five places are occupied by women, with Taylor Swift topping the list. Between June 2015 and June 2016, the magazine estimates she earned $170m, largely from her 1989 world tour.
She earned $60m more than second-placed One Direction, who were followed by Adele, Madonna and Rihanna.
What’s noticeable is how many of the biggest acts generated the bulk of their revenue from live performance. Garth Brooks, in sixth place, began his first tour in 13 years in September 2014, and has been on the road ever since, plating multiple arena shows in scores of US cities, and sometimes playing two shows per night, and taking only Christmas and August off. His tour is scheduled to continue until February 2017.
AC/DC, in seventh place, completed their Rock or Bust world tour earlier this year, and despite a number of fans demanding – and getting – refunds when singer Brian Johnson had to pull out, still earned $67.5m. The presence of Axl Rose as Johnson’s replacement doubtless helped sell some of those returned tickets.
Adele is unusual in the list, in that the bulk of her earnings came from recorded music. Her most recent album 25, released in November 2015, broke sales records on both sides of the Atlantic, and was the bestselling album of 2015.
Ninth-place Calvin Harris combined popularity as a recording and touring artist with the colossal fees he earns as a resident DJ at the Las Vegas nightspot Hakkasan. His three-year deal earns him a reported $400,000 per appearance.
Forbes calculates its figures using information from Pollstar, which tracks tour revenues, Nielsen, which measures music sales, and the Recording Industry Association of America, as well as interviews with those involved in the inner workings of business.
Since its introduction in 2003, the tax-credit system has been plagued with problems. For more than a decade, HM Revenue & Customs has struggled to respond swiftly to families’ changing circumstances, resulting in hundreds of thousands of people unwittingly owing money after being overpaid working tax credit and child tax credit. In the year to June 2016, Citizens Advice helped people with 40,000 issues relating to tax credit overpayments, a 6% increase on the previous year.
In 2014, it was reported that the government was pursuing more than 4.7m cases of overpaid tax credits, amounting to total debts of £1.6bn, and using debt collectors to do so. Since then, it seems to have continued to take a heavy-handed approach. In the past year, Citizens Advice has seen a 32% increase in the number of issues related to the recovery of tax-credit overpayments, including the involvement of debt collectors. In some cases, debt-collection agencies hold inaccurate information from HMRC and are chasing money from individuals who already been making payments via direct debit.
Anna Mee, 38, from Leicestershire spent hours on the phone trying to find out why she was being chased by a debt collector when she had been paying a direct debit to HMRC for more than a year, to clear overpayments in working tax credit and child tax credit.
The mother of three, who works in catering, said: “In the tax year 2014-15 I started the year as a single mum, unemployed. Then I became self-employed and then employed with my partner moving in. I told HMRC of every change but I still ended up with a £1,600 overpayment.”
Once she was informed that she owed money, Mee cleared £800 straight away and set up a direct-debit payment to clear the rest. She had been paying £20 a month by direct debit for a year when she received a letter from HMRC saying £600 was due outright. “I freaked out. I rang up, told them about the direct debit and they said to treat the letter like a statement and to ignore it, so I did.”
Mee then received a second letter from HMRC asking her to clear the £600 balance and treated it as a statement too, as she had been advised to. “Months later, I got a letter out of the blue from a debt-collection agency rather than HMRC. I was really upset.” Mee didn’t want to ring the debt collector because she feared that meant she would be accepting responsibility for the debt.
“I contacted HMRC and after lots of faffing around they said it was linked with the overpayment. They told me to ring the debt collector to explain. I was really unhappy about doing this so I got on to managers at HMRC and eventually they told me to quote a reference number to the debt collector. They said it was happening a lot recently,” she said.
Mee reluctantly contacted the debt-collection agency and was immediately asked if the debt was related to HMRC, before being asked for a reference number. “It seemed like it was an automated process, like this sort of thing happens all the time. They took the reference number and said ‘that’s fine’. I haven’t heard anything since,” she says. “It was a massive headache and a real worry for something that wasn’t my fault in the first place, and I was the one who had to sort it all out.”
The Credit Services Association, the UK trade body for debt-collection firms, told Guardian Money it was unable to comment as it was a matter for HMRC.
Labour MP Frank Field, chair of the work and pensions select committee, said the government needed to act immediately to rectify the errors that had triggered the overpayments.
“Following the nightmare situations they’ve been put through by Concentrix [the US firm formerly hired to handle claims], and now the hounding they’ve received from debt collectors, it’s as though thousands of hard-up families can claim tax credits only once they’ve been put through a menacing obstacle course by HMRC,” Field told the Guardian.
“Having acted swiftly to remove the Concentrix-shaped obstacle from the course, those families will now wish to see the government act immediately to rectify those errors that have triggered overpayments, and to ease off on the use of debt collectors. Such action is necessary if the prime minister’s pledge to protect Britain’s vulnerable underbelly is to be fulfilled.”
HMRC said that in a small number of cases a debt-collection agency may contact a claimant who already has a payment arrangement with HMRC. In such instances, HMRC will instruct the debt-collection agency to return the case immediately. It would not say how it expected to find out if an agency had contacted a claimant.
An HMRC spokesman said: “We work hard to ensure claimants receive the right tax-credits payments, but where an overpayment has been made on a claim, it’s only fair that the claimant pays that money back. We understand that not everyone can pay this back straightaway, and anyone who is worried that they will have difficulty repaying that money should contact us as soon as possible and we’ll explain the options available. When we let a customer down, we always apologise and put matters right.”
Theresa May’s adviser on the future of work says the boom in the gig economy could have a significant impact on government finances, with self-employed workers and contractors paying more than £2,000 less a year on average in tax than employees doing equivalent jobs.
Matthew Taylor, the former Downing Street policy expert who the prime minister has appointed to review modern employment practices – including in the fast-growing sector of app-based work for companies such as Uber and Deliveroo – said on Tuesday: “There is no question that the growth of self-employment and incorporation is having a significant impact on our revenues.”
It is not known how many of the UK’s 4.7m self-employed workers are engaged in work that could also be classed as employment, but if only 10% were, that could imply an annual loss to the exchequer of close to £1bn, according to the Guardian’s estimate.
The exchequer does not receive employer national insurance contributions on behalf of self-employed workers.
Taylor’s warning, as the review was formally launched, comes amid growing scrutiny of the employment status of workers in the gig economy. Last month, Uber, a taxi app relying on 40,000 self-employed drivers, lost an employment tribunal case when judges asserted that drivers should be classed as workers. That could mean Uber must pay national insurance contributions, as well as sick pay and paid holiday. Uber is appealing against the ruling.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, also warned last week of the “structural effect of rapidly rising incorporation and self-employment, which further erodes revenues”.
Writing in the Guardian, Taylor says Britain’s employment system “has weaknesses and is not future-proof”, and adds that the gig economy is only set to grow. He says some retailers are considering adopting Uber-style self-employment models, and are asking whether “they need people employed to work a full shift in our shop and can instead have people on call who come in for an hour or two during busy periods”.
Taylor will report back to Theresa May next year on modern employment practices and says he is concerned about businesses which “impose the expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as self-employed, deny them their due rights”.
Hermes, the parcel delivery giant which uses 10,500 self-employed couriers, is currently facing an HM Revenue and Customs investigation following multiple allegations from couriers that they should be classed as workers or employees rather than contractors. Several have said they are paid less than the national minimum wage.
The government has also announced the first official study of its kind into the scale of the gig economy and the reasons people join it, and appointed three experts to Taylor’s panel. They are Paul Broadbent the chief executive of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, Greg Marsh, the founder of the web-based homes rental site Onefinestay, and leading employment lawyer Diane Nichol. From January to March the review will take evidence in public hearings across the UK in a tour planned to take in towns and cities including Glasgow, Coventry and Maidstone.
The business minister Margot James said the government recognised the need to be open to innovative working, but said: “It is crucial that workers receive a decent wage and that people working in all sorts of jobs are able to benefit from the right balance of flexibility, rights and protections.”
Taylor also suggested that companies which lost employment tribunals should face automatic investigations to check whether illegal behaviour such as underpayment of the minimum wage or false self-employment were endemic.
“If an employer is found to be paying under the minimum wage on one or more cases, it should be more automatic that we go in and find out if those behaviours are rife in that organisation,” he said.
For work in the UK it can feel like the best of times and the worst of times. We have a flexible labour market, a strong and internationally envied record of job creation and a solid framework of individual rights. Yet hardly a day seems to go by without stories of workers being unfairly treated, whether in long-established areas of employment such as retail or care, or through new technology-enabled enterprises. Protecting our strengths while tackling the weaknesses is the overarching task facing the review of modern employment that the government has asked me to undertake. It is a daunting task but the prime minister is right to see it as a priority.
One of the key issues for the review is ensuring that our system of employment rules are fit for the fast-changing world of work. The UK’s framework of employment protections and entitlements exists to help correct the inherent power imbalance between employers and employees. Rights such as access to paid annual leave and protection from discrimination provide the statutory base line on to which most employers add further benefits as part of the employment contract. Entitlements such as the national minimum wage, employer pension contributions and parental leave also contribute to wider public policy goals.
Ensuring that workers get their due protections and entitlements is often an issue of enforcement and the review will explore whether we could do better at making sure such rules are observed. If one employee wins a claim against an employer is there a case to automatically investigate whether colleagues are also being short-changed?
As a result of government policy and changes in the labour market, self-employed people now make up about 15% of those in work in the UK. The self-employed have more flexibility and pay lower taxes in the form of national insurance, but they do not enjoy the rights or protections of employees. While there are genuine grey areas, sometimes businesses appear to impose the expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as self-employed, deny them their due rights and entitlements. The review will explore how clearer information and better support – including new forms of worker representation – might enable people to understand and enforce their rights.
Another important issue is the way our employment and tax system interact. Arrangements such as self-employment and sole trader incorporation can provide flexibility for all parties but there is also a strong financial incentive at play. Not only do the self-employed pay lower national insurance contributions, but unlike employees their labour isn’t subject to employer’s NI. If two people are doing the same task and earning the same basic remuneration on average earnings, the total tax paid to the state for the employee is about £2,000 a year more than for a self-employed contractor, or as much as £3,000 if they are working through their own company. Yet, apart from some particular entitlements such as paternity pay, the self-employed access exactly the same share of public spending per head as employees. I was pleased that the chancellor said in his autumn statement that there are issues here both of fairness between different types of worker and the long-term resilience of the tax base – and he set out that the Treasury is considering these issues.
Technology is making it easier to break down jobs into small parcels and to engage people in forms of “gig” work. Current employment and tax rules add an extra incentive to this process and encourage people to set up their own companies. I believe strongly that in achieving a fair, flexible and sustainable framework for employment, there are important roles to be played by employers, trade unions, consumers and entrepreneurs. In America, for example, new business models are combining gig work with employee ownership. As well as the challenges, the review will look at the opportunities new forms of work create for groups such as older workers and carers, and also the scope for new career progression routes.
Work is central to society, to the economy and to our individual lives. There is much to be proud of in the UK’s jobs record but our current system has weaknesses and is not future-proof. If the review succeeds it will help our nation be a leader not just in flexibility and job creation but also in laying the basis for a socially just and economically dynamic employment system fit for the future.
I have taken over the financial affairs of an elderly dementia sufferer. In March 2013, he signed up with Money Club and paid an annual fee of £98. At that time he had just started losing his memory and he does not own a computer or have the mental capacity to use the service, so I’m baffled as to how it sold him the membership. Another £98 was taken in March 2014 and since then a further 20 payments have been taken by direct debit totalling £2,148. I have attempted to contact Money Club without success. He should only have been charged three payments of £98 from 2013 to 2016. JS, Manchester
The Money Club has a habit of cold calling with the offer of a free trial, then committing householders to an annual subscription without them being fully aware of what they are signing up to. Calling itself “the UK’s premier shopping club”, it runs a discount and cashback website. Several Cash readers have found themselves paying way over the odds as the annual £98 subscription is randomly debited. One reader recently told me an account had been debited 29 times in five years.
The Money Club blames a computer upgrade. “The frequency of his payments, which should have been set to annually, was left blank and, as a result, collections have been made on a fairly arbitrary basis,” it says. “We can find no trace of him using the club, which is probably why the error has not been picked up.”
It is refunding all the payments, but you should make sure the direct debit is cancelled.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
The town is a mile from this three-bedroom cottage facing the Atlantic spray, although the public car park a few yards away tempts the crowds nearer than you might wish. Gaze over the sea from the vaulted living room and the wrap-around terrace, and launch your boat from a slipway at the end of the 1.7 acres of garden. The interiors have been done up with rustic chic, and there was permission to turn a fisherman’s hut into a studio but it has lapsed. The price dwarfs the size of the accommodation, however. Guide price: £795,000. Savills , 01872 243200
Supermarket shoppers can pick up everything they need for Christmas dinner for eight people for less than £20 this year, a survey has found.
The cost of buying 11 Christmas dinner essentials – including a turkey, plum pudding, fresh vegetables and cranberry sauce – comes out at £19.82, or £2.48 a head, after shopping around for the best prices at Aldi, Lidl, Asda, Morrisons and Iceland, Good Housekeeping magazine found in its annual festive shopping basket cost survey.
Good Housekeeping tracked the price of the 11 products across 10 major supermarket chains and found prices were the cheapest since it began its survey eight years ago. The overall cost has dropped 10.8% since 2009, when the price for Christmas dinner was £2.78 a head.
The reduced cost of groceries at Aldi and Lidl was the main contributor to the fall in the overall price of the Christmas dinner shopping basket compared to 2015, according to Good Housekeeping.
Food prices generally have been driven down in recent years as the big four supermarkets – Tesco, Asda, Sainbury’s and Morrisons – have reacted to the rise of German discounters Aldi and Lidl with aggressive price cutting.
However, supermarkets have warned that prices are likely to rise next year as the falling value of the pound against the dollar and euro following the vote to leave the EU pushes up the price of imported products and ingredients.
Of the 11 foods tracked by Good Housekeeping to provide a Christmas meal with all the trimmings, six have gone down in price, including turkey, and three have stayed the same as last year. Only the prices of Christmas pudding and mince pies have increased, as the price of imported raisins, butter, flour and sugar has jumped since 2015, due to a combination of factors including the collapse of the pound and weaker supplies.
Aldi was the cheapest supermarket for those wanting a one-stop shop, where the ingredients for Christmas dinner for eight cost just £22.03. Aldi’s basket is 11% cheaper than last year’s winner, Iceland, which this year falls to third place (£24.81), behind Lidl in second place (£24.57). The most expensive basket was from Marks & Spencer (£49.40) followed by Waitrose (£40.02).
“Supermarket shoppers will be relieved to see Christmas essentials are still so affordable,” said Caroline Bloor, the consumer director of Good Housekeeping. “While five of the supermarkets have cheaper baskets this year, it’s mainly thanks to the big decrease in the cost of these groceries at Aldi and Lidl that the overall basket is significantly cheaper. So think carefully where you shop or you could end up paying twice as much.”
Tony Baines, the joint managing director of corporate buying at Aldi, said: “At Aldi, our customers get the same quality as M&S and Waitrose, but at prices significantly cheaper than Iceland. We know that this is more important than ever at Christmas time.”
This year’s Christmas Dinner Index, from analysts Mintec, which compares the cost of a slightly different basket of products including turkey, vegetables and pork, found that the price of the festive meal rose by 1% year-on-year and is still lower than both 2013 and 2014.
Potato prices rose 52% in the year to November, it said, as bad weather hit yields and delayed planting and harvesting, while similar conditions contributed to a 65% rise in onion prices. Parsnips were up 14%, but carrot prices were down year-on-year thanks to lower demand in Europe, where domestic supplies were higher.
Strong demand in China and worries about lower production in the UK sent pork prices higher by 14% year-on-year. But that was offset by a 2% drop in turkey prices, which accounts for a larger proportion of the meal and weighs more heavily on the index.
But Mintec warned shoppers that there could be further price rises ahead. “It is worth noting that prices are likely to rise in December as demand continues to increase,” it said. “So stocking up on turkey and pork early is probably the best course of action.”
The quietly devastating National Audit Office (NAO) report shreds five years of ministerial bluster, misinformation and spin about the purported virtues of benefit sanctions, arguably one of the most brutal, controversial and ineffectual social policies of recent times.
Sanctions are a punishment applied to benefit claimants adjudged to have infringed jobcentre rules. If claimants fail to turn up for appointments or to apply for enough jobs, officials effectively fine them by stopping their benefit payments for a minimum of four weeks (around £300). Between 2011 and 2015, almost one in four of all jobseeker’s allowance claimants were sanctioned. In 2015 alone, sanctions led to an estimated £132m in benefits being withheld from some of the UK’s poorest citizens.
Anti-poverty campaigners, food banks, academics and MPs have warned for years that sanctions were dangerous: they can lead to debt and rent arrears, depression, hunger, food bank use, survival crime, destitution and worse. Sanctions, they have pointed out, can be handed out capriciously or cynically to meet jobcentre targets. In some cases, such as that of diabetic former soldier David Clapson, found dead in his flat in 2013, starved and penniless, the potentially lethal consequences of benefit sanctions have seemed incontrovertible.
The Department for Work and Pensions has imperiously dismissed those warnings throughout. It has regularly assured us that sanctions “work”. They provide a deterrent effect to the half-hearted job seeker, and a kick up the backside to the lazy and feckless to make them “focus and get on”, the DWP insists. Sanctions, claimed the former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith in March, were “the reason why we now have the highest employment levels ever in the UK”.
The NAO reveals that those assertions were essentially baseless. The DWP had no clue whether sanctions worked, and zero interest in finding out. When the scope and severity of sanctions were increased in 2012, leading to a rapid rise in the number affected, it had no evidence to justify the change and no idea what the likely effect on claimants would be. It did not know the financial costs of sanctions or the wider knock-on impact on health services, let alone any potential benefits, and actively resisted any attempt by others to find out. Last year the DWP summarily rejected calls from both an all-party committee of MPs and its own social security advisory committee for a formal review of sanctions.
Most damning of all is the unravelling of the claim by ministers that sanctions are instrumental in getting people into work. This was a fragile claim to begin with: the DWP’s own advisers have pointed out that there is no evidence to support it. Employment companies running the DWP’s work programme warned last year that for most jobseekers, sanctions actually made getting a job harder.
The DWP cites flimsy international studies to support its claim that sanctions lead to jobs, but has never analysed its own data to discover how stopping benefits affects claimant behaviour or employment outcomes. 
The NAO conducted its own preliminary analysis of DWP data and found that sanctioned claimants were as likely to stop claiming benefits altogether as they were to get a job. The effect on sick and disabled unemployed claimants was even more stark: the NAO found sanctions were likely to have discouraged them from working.
That the DWP’s benefit sanctions policy in recent years was created in a largely evidence-free zone, or that once it was in place, ministers misrepresented its effects (and were upbraided by the statistics watchdog), or that it sought to dismiss any criticism, however well founded, will surprise no one who has followed social security in the Duncan Smith era. The benefit cap is a similarly aggressive policy championed by ministers with a fervent faith out of all proportion with the evidence that it works.
The challenge for the current work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, who likes to suggest that he is cut from a different cloth from his controversial predecessor-but-one, is to show that he can listen to the NAO’s concerns. The first step, the NAO says, should be to institute a wide-ranging review of sanctions; the second, a genuine attempt to understand their wider impact. Green’s response should tell us whether he really offers any new insights, or simply more of the same.
Nils Pratley (PM needs to stand firm on executive pay ratios, 29 November) alerts us to the fact that directors are already lobbying hard to water down Theresa May’s early proposal to shed light on employee pay ratios. May was unrelenting in her support for the austerity policies imposed by her government since 2010 and the havoc they have created for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in our in our society. Now’s the time for her to do what she said she would do.
What’s the risk in making companies publish details of every employee’s terms and contracts of employment, pension contributions, share options, severance terms, expense account arrangements, perks etc? Not all boardrooms are full of self-serving, me-first executives. However, many are. It was the boards of our leading banks and financial institutions – working hand in glove with some of the most unsavoury characters in the business world – who created the problems we are facing today. It’s time for business leaders to stand up and be counted. How many can truly say that their employees are fairly treated?
David Beswick
Harrogate, North Yorkshire
• As regards worker representation on boards, “We are not going to make it happen,” Greg Clark told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that the government did not want to “overturn what has been a successful system which has had the confidence of business around the world”. Success for whom or what, one should ask; it certainly has not been good for the workers, whom the government supposedly represents – democracy does not include votes from self-serving legal entities. We also should consider its success in Germany and other European countries. 
Robert Sherman
Barrister and accredited mediator, London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
An 89-year-old war veteran who placed an advert in his local paper to find a job to stop him “dying of boredom” has said he is hoping for a happy ending and part-time work.
Joe Bartley, from Paignton in south Devon, placed the ad in the Herald Express twice last month. It reads: “Senior citizen 89 seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”
Bartley told the Guardian the reaction to his advert has been “blinkin’ mad”, adding that he was in danger of becoming a celebrity.
“When I first put in the ad, I thought it was just an old guy looking for work – I don’t really see what is strange about that,” he said. “But have I now reached celebrity status? That might worry some people, but it doesn’t worry me. I’m rather chuffed in a way.”
Bartley has lived alone since his wife Cassandra died two years ago. “I miss my wife dreadfully, and when you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into that flat it’s like solitary confinement.”
Bartley, who is originally from Liverpool but has lived in Devon for more than 50 years, has no children and he is in not in regular contact with his late wife’s family. Since the advert went out he has been contacted by an old friend in North Devon, and hopes others might see his story and get in touch.
“I like reading, and I’ll watch a bit of television but there’s a lot of guff on these days. I just got bored stiff with nothing to do, and I thought even though I am 89 I can still work. I can work a hoover, I can clean tables, some gardening - anything really.”
Bartley has already taken phone calls from two different “lady callers”, who offered him odd-job work, but not the regular part-time work he is looking for. “One wanted a wardrobe put together, and another lady said she needed two rooms painted – but I told them it’s regular work I’m after.”
The veteran, who was member of the Airborne Forces and served in Palestine after the second world war, said he wanted regular work to be able to pay his bills. “I wanted at least 20 hours and then I can cover the rent. I get housing support, which is great, but I want to be my own man and pay my own way.”
The pensioner served in the army for 11 years, joining just before the end of the war when he was 18. “I did enjoy the comradeship, but then I sometimes wonder if it was a bit of a waste of my life, when I think of what else I could have done.”
He then trained as a signwriter. “It was a good trade that went out of the window with plastic signs. I’ve still got all my old gear, but my hands are a bit stiff these days,” he said.
Although the offer of regular part-time work has not arrived yet, Bartley is hopeful that he will find work that will use his skills, keep him occupied and introduce him to new people.
“I’m really glad I put the advert in, hopefully something good will come of it,” he said. “The thing that has always kept me going is my sense of humour. I like a laugh – and I like a happy ending.”
A row has broken out over the use of animal fat in the new plastic £5 note, with calls from some vegans and vegetarians for the production process to be changed.
A petition has been launched calling for the use of tallow, a substance made from animal fat, in the banknotes to be stopped. The petition has attracted more than 70,000 supporters so far and will be delivered to the Bank of England.
The petition says: “The new £5 notes contain animal fat in the form of tallow. This is unacceptable to millions of vegans and vegetarians in the UK. We demand that you cease to use animal products in the production of currency that we have to use.”
The Bank of England declined to comment on the petition. A spokeswoman said the issue was the polymer that the new £5 notes are printed on, which contains tallow. The central bank buys polymer pellets from an external company, Innovia Security, which supplies banknote substrate for 80 denominations in 24 countries.
The issue came to light when the Bank responded to a question on Twitter, confirming that the polymer pellets contained traces of tallow.
The issue caused a storm on Twitter, where people voiced their protest on behalf of vegans, vegetarians and some religious groups. Tallow is also used to make household items such as candles and soap.
But others offered to take the £5 plastic notes off vegans’ hands.
The new plastic fivers entered circulation in September and are much hardier than paper money – they can survive being drenched in red wine or a spin in the washing machine. However, they shrink and melt at temperatures above 120C, so can be damaged by an iron. They are hard to tear – but if they do suffer a nick they then tear easily. The Bank has also had to admit that brand new polymer notes can sometimes stick together.
Plastic money is used in many other countries, some of which have switched completely to polymer banknotes, such as Australia, Canada, Romania and Vietnam.
A wide range of high-cost credit – from catalogue loans to overdrafts – is to be reviewed by the Financial Conduct Authority in a move that could herald price caps similar to those imposed on payday loans.
Since 2015, the City regulator has prevented payday loan customers paying back any more than twice the value of the amount borrowed. The FCA will now look at whether the cap has restricted credit, driving customers to loan sharks. The findings of the review will be published in the summer of 2017.
It is thought that as many as 400,000 people use high-cost credit deals from retailers to buy household appliances and furniture. After interest is added, consumers can often end up paying more than twice the original price, spread over a number of years.
Andrew Bailey, the chief executive of the FCA, said: “This is a significant moment for our approach to consumer credit regulation as we continue to ensure that this market works well for consumers.
“We have come up to the point of reviewing the cap on payday lending, making now the right time to take a broader view of the issues around high-cost credit, including unarranged overdrafts, and to consider whether our requirements remain appropriate.”
The evidence-gathering exercise – known as a call for inputs – will look at whether high-cost loans are causing detriment to customers. This could prompt the FCA to take action, such as imposing caps on rates. It listed doorstep lending, catalogue credit, some rent-to-own, pawnbroking, guarantor and logbook loans – where cars are used as security – as being in its sights. 
Overdrafts are also part of the review, which the regulator signalled earlier this month when it said these loan facilities would be part of its review into high-interest loans.
The regulator is also aiming to establish what impact its intervention on payday loans has had. High-cost, short-term credit loans are capped at 0.8% of the amount borrowed per day, and for borrowers who do not repay their loans on time, default charges must not exceed £15. 
“The FCA is also keen to see if there is any evidence of consumers turning to illegal money lenders directly as a result of being excluded from high-cost credit because of the price cap,” the regulator said. 
Theresa May is not back-pedalling on her pledge to give workers a voice on company boards, the business secretary has said in response to criticism of the government’s announcement that it will not force companies to give employees a governance position.
The government unveiled proposals on Tuesday to tackle corporate excess. May had raised the prospect of placing employee representatives on boards during her Conservative leadership campaign over the summer, but has since told businesses she will not make them do so.
Greg Clark said the prime minister wanted workers to be represented, but not necessarily by having an employee on the board.
“We are not going to make it happen,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that the government did not want to “overturn what has been a successful system which has had the confidence of business around the world”.
“What we are proposing today is a range of proposals, including a non-executive director who has an explicit obligation to engage with the workforce, to report into the board, to chair a stakeholder panel and influence the renumeration committee.”
Asked if the government was breaking the spirit of May’s promise, Clark said: “I don’t think that’s right – this is a big change in the way that we have conducted corporate governance. We have this legal tradition of having a unitary board, not delegates of groups but function for the whole interests of the company. That has been successful so I would not want to mandate the replacement of something that had been successful.”
The Trades Union Congress urged May to stick to her promise of putting workers on boards. Speaking earlier in the programme, the general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “It It is very clear from the poll the TUC is publishing today, that the majority of people want the prime minister to keep her promise to have elected workers on boards. That’s not just because it’s the right thing to do, it is better for business too.
“In countries that have workers on boards, which is the majority in Europe, it shows that they have better investment in R&D, better investment in skills and they tend to take decision that are more about the long term, because of course, workers are champions of the long-term success of a company because their livelihoods depend on it.”
She urged May not to water down the promise by substituting workers on boards with a person who would represent the “voice of workers”.
“Having a glorified suggestion box or giving that responsibility to an existing member of the board does not amount to a genuine voice for workers. The only way you can have a genuine voice for workers is workers elect them.”
She said people were fed up with the behaviour of some boards. 
“There has been a degree of snobbery about whether workers can cut it in the board room. It is important that the prime minister, who said on the day of the autumn statement that she made no apologies for the fact that her government is going to deliver on that promise. If she doesn’t then people will question what other promises could be broken.”
Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said May had “rowed back on her flagship policy of putting workers on boards. Sadly, this green paper looks like offering tokenism rather than a much-needed call to action.
“The real test has to be whether these proposals would have saved jobs and pensions at BHS or prevented the gross mistreatment of staff at Sports Direct, and whether they’ll tackle the scourge of low pay and escalated executive pay. Anything that falls short of doing that is just not good enough.”
Among the proposals for corporate reform could be the idea of publishing pay ratios – the difference between the chief executive’s pay and that of the workforce.
The green paper will have three sections: one on remuneration, one on stakeholder engagement and a third that asks what elements of these should apply to private companies.
Britain’s banks and building societies are promising a radical change to the way account holders send money to other people in a bid to tackle ballooning fraud and “fat finger” problems.
In future, the “confirmation of payee” system will mean that when someone types in a sort code and account number to transfer some money, they will receive an instant message saying something like “Is ‘Fred Bloggs’ the person/business you intended to send the money to?” Crucially, this will appear before the money leaves the person’s account.
Currently, customers only receive a confirmation that they have sent their money to a specific sort code and account number. Many people also type in the account name of the person they’re paying, but this is irrelevant as banks do not cross-check this element when processing payments.
The result is cases where individuals enter a wrong number on the eight-digit account number – dubbed a fat finger error – and the money goes to an unintended recipient. In some cases the mistake can be repeated for years – and the banks are not liable.
In one case covered by the Guardian, a hairdresser intended to send her monthly salary payment from HSBC to a joint Nationwide account with her husband, but initially entered a digit incorrectly. Over two years £26,000 of her pay went to another individual with a Nationwide account, and she has spent years fighting to recover it.
A new-style fraud, meanwhile, is seeing criminals hijack the emails of builders or solicitors. Customers are sent instructions to make future payments to a new account – still in the name of the builder or solicitor – with a new account number. In one case a couple were conned into sending £25,000 to the wrong account, and their bank refused any compensation.
According to the Payment Strategy Forum (PSF), which is handling the implementation for the banks and building societies, the “confirmation of payee” system should largely eliminate both problems. Account holders will still not have to enter the intended recipient’s name, but will continue to enter the sort code and account number as they do currently – crucially, however, they will then receive a message matching the sort code and account number with the specific account holder – such as “John Smith Builders”.
The exact implementation date and the precise message that account holders will be sent is yet to be determined, as the move requires a major systems change at banks to enable them to instantly identify recipients. The PSF says the latest date will be 2020, but it hopes the system could be in place for launch in 2018.
“The confirmation of payee system ... will allow people to avoid sending payments to the wrong account, either by accident or being tricked into doing so, by ensuring a confirmation of the recipient is sent to the payer before any funds leave their account,” said Ruth Evans, chair of the forum, which is also examining ways in which account holders can bar their regular direct debits from leaving their account when they are short of money.
Currently, if someone is close to their overdraft limit and, say, they have an unusually large mobile phone bill that month, it could push them into hefty charges when it is paid by the bank, or be bounced and leave the account holder with a possible unpaid transaction fee.
The forum’s proposal is for a “request to pay” system whereby the mobile phone company would have to send a message to the account holder, through the bank, that it is about to take payment. The account holder could then accept or decline the payment.
Evans said: “Request to pay will allow customers to authorise a regular payment, such as a utility bill or gym membership, before the company withdraws the money from their account. This will be a huge boost to people on variable incomes who may struggle to settle their accounts at the same time each month.”
About £75tn in payments was processed through Britain’s banks and building societies last year, but it is estimated that about £755m was stolen.
In September, consumer body Which? lodged a “supercomplaint” with financial regulators demanding that UK banks do more to protect customers tricked into transferring money to fraudsters.
Which? said banks should “shoulder more responsibility” when someone is conned into transferring money, just as they reimburse customers who lose money due to scams involving debit and credit cards or fraudulent account activity.
HSBC, which I have personally banked with since 1964, recently announced that it will close the four accounts we hold for the campaign organisation Searchlight following a “review”. In a follow-up email it insisted there is nothing we can do to change the decision and that it will not give us a reason.
Searchlight has campaigned against racism and fascism for 52 years, published a magazine since 1975, and is well respected. We are not aligned to any political party and are multi-faith. We currently work with the University of Northampton and recently launched a research arm, Searchlight Research Associates, with many distinguished patrons.
We have no overdraft facility – our income comes from occasional grants, donations and subscriptions and is paid in by cheque, standing order or bank transfer. We have hardly any international transactions. We can think of nothing in our use of the accounts that could possibly give rise to any concerns.
The only reason I can think of is that the fascist individuals and organisations that Searchlight combats have maliciously given false information to the bank for the sole purpose of getting our accounts closed, and the bank has accepted it without investigation. Obviously, this is very disruptive and we are applying for new accounts with another bank but we don’t know whether it will accept our application in view of HSBC’s action. Although HSBC is acting within its terms and conditions, its unilateral action is contrary to all principles of justice. GG, Ilford, Essex
There’s nothing you can do to change the decision, says HSBC – except write to the media. As soon as I contact the bank you receive a flurry of phone calls and then two senior officials beg a meeting. The upshot is that the four accounts are reinstated with no more of an explanation than when they were closed. Its press office will only comment opaquely: “HSBC aims to provide the highest standard of customer service … where this has not been met we endeavour to work closely with the customer to resolve any issue as soon as possible.”
Abrupt closure of bank accounts without explanation is becoming a worryingly frequent issue in my inbox as banks run scared of draconian US crackdowns on anyone deemed complicit in money laundering. HSBC narrowly avoided prosecution by the US Congress, so the chances are it is neurotically reacting to any account with political overtones or foreign transactions, be it owned by a suburban householder or a high-profile campaigning group.
You’re lucky. Very rarely in my experience do the banks capitulate and reverse their decisions, however mystifying.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
The government has promised to “stamp out” abuses highlighted in a Guardian campaign that revealed how some buyers of new-build homes have been left with virtually unsaleable properties because of rapidly escalating ground rents.
Many buyers of new-build homes, particularly in the north west of England, have been sold their properties on a leasehold basis. Traditionally homes have been sold freehold, but new-style leasehold homes come with ground rents that in some cases double every 10 years. Residents are facing rising costs, or struggling to sell their properties when they want to move.
Answering a question raised by the MP Peter Bottomley, communities secretary Sajid Javid said: “We must make sure the kind of abuses he mentioned are stamped out and we will continue to do everything [we can]. We do work with a number of stakeholders and we can certainly see how we can do more.”
In one case reported by the Guardian, a buyer of a £101,000 flat in Dudley built in 2010 by Taylor Wimpey found that his wife’s ground rent was set to spiral to £8,000 a year. He said the couple were now trapped in an apartment they could no longer sell because the ground rent review clause in the lease was preventing lenders approving a mortgage.
Clair Scott was another new home buyer devastated by soaring ground rents that have made her £200,000 mid-terrace three-bed house in Bolton, built only six years ago, almost unsaleable.
She claims solicitors advised her buyers not to touch her house as the terms of the lease meant that by 2060 the ground rent would be £9,440 a year. “The sale fell through, and all parties involved are devastated after losing a lot of time and money.”
Others have revealed how houses were sold by developers with the promise that a 999-year lease was “virtually freehold” only to discover that buying out the lease just a few years later was three or four times more expensive than promised.
Bottomley, MP for Worthing West, has been among the sternest critics of leasehold issues for many years.
In a House of Commons question following the government’s promise to build thousands of new homes, he said: “Given that half the new homes will be leasehold, and given the past problems, the present difficulties and the future possibilities of abuse, will my right honourable friend please get together with the Sunday Times and the Guardian, who are covering these abuses, and reassure ordinary people buying their first home that they don’t find it unsaleable and of no value when they come to leave?”
Analysis by campaign group Leasehold Knowledge Partnership earlier this month revealed that nearly £2bn-worth of new-build leasehold houses were sold in England and Wales last year. In most cases, the developer sells the freehold after a couple of years to a private company, which are then sometimes accused of demanding extortionate fees by homebuyers.
Ground rents are distinct from service charges, which are levied on top. The service charge in a block of flats will pay, for example, for the upkeep of the “common parts” of a development. But no services are offered in return for the ground rent, which is more akin to a tax.
Ground rents have become hugely popular among some investors, as they promise a lucrative guaranteed future income stream at a time when interest rates are at historic lows. Until 2011, the ground rent escalation clauses in many Taylor Wimpey contracts allowed for doubling every ten years, although since then they have shifted to an RPI basis.
Following the Guardian’s campaign, Taylor Wimpey has also promised to review its contracts. It said: “We hadn’t been aware of the concern of some customers and homeowners regarding these pre-RPI clauses and the difficulties that they are currently experiencing in selling or mortgaging their homes. Having heard the cases described and in order to establish the facts, we are undertaking a review of this situation.”
However, conveyancing solicitors who enabled the purchase of a leasehold property without highlighting onerous ground rent clauses are now facing a raft of legal actions from furious buyers.
The government has confirmed state pension will rise by 2.5% in April 2017, as a report shows that the “triple lock” promise on payments could push up the cost of providing the benefit by more than a third over the next three decades.
From April, pensioners on the new flat rate pension will see their weekly payments increase to £159.55 from £155.65 currently, while the old state pension will rise to £122.30 from £119.30.
The increase is in line with earnings growth, and also the minimum payment promised to pensioners through the triple lock.
This promise, introduced in 2010 by George Osborne, says that each year pensions will rise by whichever is the highest figure out of inflation, earnings growth and 2.5%. The pledge is set to continue until 2020, but in his recent autumn statement the new chancellor, Philip Hammond, hinted that it could be scrapped after that.
Figures from independent research group Pensions Policy Institute show that if it is kept, the cost of providing a state pension will rise from 5.3% of GDP currently, to 7.2% by 2046. Without changes to the state pension age, which will mean from 2028 it can only be claimed at age 67, the cost would have been another 0.3% of GDP the PPI said.
Commenting on the increase to weekly payments, Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at IFA firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said it was ironic that earnings growth had hit the 2.5% figure promised by the government, making the government’s promise to underpin the increase redundant.
“There is a fair bet that this time next year, it’ll be inflation hitting the highest number,” he said.
He added: “Pensioners can’t continue to enjoy indefinitely a ‘heads I win, tails you lose’ guarantee at the expense of taxpayers. A review now looking beyond 2020 makes sense.”
McPhail said there were reasons to be cautious in favour of those approaching retirement. “Final salary pay outs are about to start diminishing and some are arguing that existing private pension inflation proofing should be cut. Politicians have to strike a delicate balance but if they take too much away from pensioners they could end up sowing the seeds of the next pensioner income crisis.”
The PPI’s report, The New Pensions Landscape, found that both automatic enrolment into pensions and the triple lock were set to increase retirement incomes, but increases to the state pension age meant over their lifetime individuals would receive less on average.
It found that changes to the system meant that on average pensioners were better off that they had ever been, but that those aged between 56 and 60 did face lower incomes in retirement than those who have already stopped work. Current retirees are more likely to have final salary pensions and to receive their state pensions for longer.
Daniela Silcock, head of policy research at the PPI said: “Looking forward, both the ‘triple lock’ and automatic enrolment could significantly increase the level of people’s retirement incomes.
“For those nearest state pension age the triple lock has the most immediate effect whereas younger individuals may gain most from automatic enrolment.”
A child born in Britain today may never see fuel poverty eradicated, according to a report backed by the star of I, Daniel Blake –Ken Loach’s critically acclaimed film about the benefits system.
The report, published by charity National Energy Action to kick off its Warm Homes Campaign, documents stagnating efforts to solve fuel poverty. The government has pledged to make as many “fuel poor” homes as possible achieve a minimum standard of energy efficiency by 2030, in an attempt to end fuel poverty.
People in 4 million UK households face restricted life chances because they live in a cold, damp property, according to the NEA report.
It warned that that the current rate of progress in tackling the problem means fuel poverty will not have ended by the time a child born today turns 80. The average life expectancy at birth in the UK is 83 years for girls and 79 for boys, according to the Office for National Statistics.
People are defined as fuel poor in England and Wales if the cost of heating their home is high, but meeting this amount would see them fall below the poverty line.
While the number of fuel poor households is lower than it was at the peak of the recession in 2009, it crept up from 2.36 million in 2012 to 2.38 million in 2014, the latest year for which figures are available.
The average fuel poverty gap – between households’ energy bills and what they can afford to pay – has grown in the past decade from £235 in 2003 to £371 in 2014, or £882m at a national level.
The actor Dave Johns, who played the lead character in I, Daniel Blake, said: “It is a complete scandal that people die because they can’t afford to heat their homes.
“I’m backing NEA’s Warm Homes Campaign to highlight what help is available to cope with rising energy bills as winter takes hold, and demand more support from the government.”
NEA cited low levels of energy efficiency in poor-quality housing and difficulty accessing the cheapest energy tariffs, forcing residents to tolerate the cold or spend more on fuel than wealthier people who live in well-insulated homes.
The UK is lagging behind the rest of the world on energy efficiency measures such as insulation, according to NEA.
The Committee on Climate Change recently said the UK has “no action plan” to improve energy efficiency, while the National Audit Office has lamented the lack of investment.
The Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas said: “We know that investing in energy efficiency reduces people’s bills, cuts carbon emissions and keeps people warm, yet the government is slashing support for insulation. 
“This approach fails people living in fuel poverty who can’t afford to keep their homes warm and is utterly misguided financially.
“Britain should be leading the way, making energy efficiency and home insulation an overriding infrastructure priority.
“Let’s not get left behind other countries who are now leaving us in their wake as they drastically reduce their energy demand.”
NEA also identified stagnant wage growth, coupled with rising energy bills, as the key factors keeping people mired in fuel poverty.
“We need to see much more ambition from national and local government if we are to end the unnecessary cost and suffering caused by fuel poverty,” said the NEA chief executive, Jenny Saunders.
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “The government is committed to tackling fuel poverty. The warm home discount will ensure that more than 2 million households will receive £140 off their energy bills this winter.
“The best long-term solution is to improve the energy efficiency of households. We are reforming the requirement on energy companies to install efficiency measures in homes across Great Britain, which will insulate 1m homes by 2020, tackling the root cause of fuel poverty.”
A Labour spokesman said: “As the cold weather hits, many people will be worrying about how they’ll pay their energy bills this winter. It is unacceptable that the big six energy companies are raking in profits while families have to choose between heating their home and putting food on the table.
“Labour have led the way by calling for caps on energy bills while we fix our broken energy market. David Cameron promised parliament 17 times that he would force energy companies, by law, to put all customers on their cheapest tariff, but still the government are doing nothing to help people with energy costs. Once again, we have seen that we can’t trust the Tories to stand up for ordinary people.”
The ‘challenger’ energy firm had 160,000 customers, many of whom are in credit. Here’s the lowdown
It may have been Australia’s first values-led business. At least 7,000 years ago, the Gunditjmara people of south-west Victoria created an eel farming system. It would have supplied enough eels for more than 10,000 people, far more than the Gunditjmara population of the time.
The Gunditjmara smoked the eels and traded them with other Aboriginal nations. It was a successful economy based on healthy lifestyles and stewardship that worked with the natural environment as the farms shifted and changed with the seasons, with floods and droughts.
Last year, when I attended Purpose, the values-led business conference, I discovered the similarities between BCorps and the principles that have always governed Aboriginal business. And there is much that non-Indigenous businesses can learn from us when looking for models that create a positive impact on the world and generate prosperity.
The Gunditjmara eel farm was an early example of an Aboriginal economy based on key principles of contemporary values-led business. The farms engaged with seasonal changes to have a positive environmental impact, creating a new ecological system rich with vegetables and waterbirds.
The woven traps were made from biodegradable locally sourced materials. Efficiency was key, with people spending the minimum amount of time acquiring food. The smoked eels were a unique product traded with other nations. And the Gunditjmara Elders had a succession plan. To this day they teach young people how to weave the traps, where to place the stones, and how to smoke the eels.
I named my company Kalinya, which in my language, that of the Yorta Yorta people of northern Victoria, means good, beautiful and honest. This is to serve as a constant reminder to practise Aboriginal ways of working as I move into the business sector.
I have grown up around Aboriginal ways of working where the wellbeing of staff and the extended Aboriginal community comes first. As a small child I would spend hours playing under boardroom tables listening to the debates of my Elders. Both my parents worked in Aboriginal community-controlled organisations, and it was within these places of Aboriginal leadership that I gained an early education in our civil rights history. Kids are welcome within Aboriginal workplaces. We joke and laugh. Our leaders are always accessible. Cultural protocols are valued. And we support each other in times of hardship.
Business is not new to us; our economies stretch back tens of thousands of years. Yolgu people from Arnhem Land were engaging in international trade long before colonisation: the Macassan people would come from Indonesia to trade cloth, tobacco, rice and knives for sea cucumbers that were valued for medicinal purposes.
Post-colonisation, our people continued to run successful enterprises. Coranderrk Station in Healesville, Victoria, ran successfully for many years selling wheat, hops and crafts. In 1881 produce from the farm won first prize at the Melbourne international exhibition.
It was the success of Coranderrk that led to its downfall. When the farms flourished, neighbouring non-Indigenous farmers petitioned that the land was now too valuable for Aboriginal people and the station was closed.
We are coming into a critical time for Aboriginal enterprise. There is a growing interest in Aboriginal knowledge, a trend for uniquely Australian products, and an increased awareness of native foods, medicinal plants and beauty treatments.
But as Aboriginal business owners, we must remember what happened at Coranderrk and equip ourselves for this wave of increased interest. We need to protect our intellectual property and trademark our ideas so we can rebuild our economies in a way that is true to our principles.
When you are systematically pushed out of an economy, it does terrible things for your self-confidence. The hardest part of running a business for me has been valuing my unique knowledge as an Aboriginal woman. For years I have worked 50-hour weeks and lost money. I was partnering with non-Indigenous companies who charge standard industry prices, while I charged reduced rates. I was paying my suppliers double the amount I was charging clients. It was a rookie error but there is something at play that goes beyond the need for business mentoring and support for Aboriginal start-ups. It speaks to our self-confidence.
Colonisation is a system designed to break up social structures. When our people were put on missions, we were robbed of our ability to practise culture, sustain a healthy lifestyle and our economies were broken down. The Gunditjmara could no longer farm eels and our trade routes were destroyed.
Colonisation works by making Indigenous people dependant. As wards of the state, our people were not paid cash, in the new cash economy, but rather given ration cards to get flour, tea and sugar. Our Ancestors built the railroads, made up a large portion of the shearing industry and worked tirelessly as domestic staff, but until the 1970s the government could confiscate 70% of an Aboriginal person’s wage.
To decolonise, we have to understand that Aboriginal people have been systematically pushed out of the Australian economy and rid ourselves of the misconception that we are somehow inherently “bad” with money.
Countless generations of our Ancestors ran successful businesses. They developed unique products and traded with different nations. Our pre-colonisation economies cared for Country. As the Gunditjmara eel farms show, Aboriginal business can have a positive environmental impact.
As our lives have adapted to contemporary Australian life, we have retained Aboriginal ways of working, which put people and culture first. We value the knowledge of our Elders and create succession plans to ensure the wellbeing of future generations. These fundamental principles are at the heart of values-led business. As the sector takes off, it is an opportunity for Aboriginal entrepreneurship to shine.
Elders, Ancestors and Country is capitalised in recognition of Aboriginal kinship structures, relationship to the land and in respect of cultural protocol.
•Jirra Lulla Harvey will be speaking at Purpose Sydney, which runs from 5-6 December
I am delighted to learn that the UK government is to encourage the production of electric cars (Report, 26 November). But there is only a very brief mention of the need for the adequate provision of charge points. My wife and I took delivery of our first electric car, a Nissan Leaf, six months ago. It is our only car. We live in a rural area. We can manage round trips of up to 100 miles easily, relying solely on our domestic charge point for topping up at night.
For longer trips, however, we need to know that there are properly functioning charge points available to enable quick recharges to get us safely home without the anxiety of possibly being stranded on the way back. Unfortunately we regularly find charge points out of order, even in major centres such as Newcastle. On a recent trip to Durham, right on the far edge of our range, we found that the only rapid charge point at an out-of-town park-and-ride centre had been out of order for a long time. If the use of electric cars is to be seriously encouraged, the provision of a good network of readily accessible and reliable charge points has to be given absolute priority.
Clive Wilkinson
Rothbury, Northumberland
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
As a lifelong Rolling Stones fan who fully recognises their genuine respect for the blues and its heritage (Reviews, G2, 25 November), I find it all the more disappointing that their (black) bass player Darryl Jones is not included in band photos and still appears to be treated as a mere hired hand, 23 years after he replaced Bill Wyman.
Graham Larkbey
London
• Nick Wyatt (Letters, 28 November) asks how many bathtubs make one Wales. You can’t equate a measure of volume with one of area, but for the record, if all of the sugary drinks consumed by 11- to 18-year-olds in one year were poured over Wales, the resulting sticky mess would be about an inch deep.
Dr David Harper
Cambridge
• Conundrum: I share the cost of the Guardian with my husband. He reads all the sport section, I find so little reporting of women’s sport that I don’t bother. What percentage should I pay or just continue to use it to light the fire?
Jenny Jeater
Hassocks, West Sussex
• No wonder there are so many estate agents – I learn that not only do they charge me as a landlord a fee for making the inventory of the flat at the change of tenants, they charge the tenant as well (Unfair letting fees ban? Truth is the agents just got too greedy, 26 November).
Mette Marston
London
• Is it really such a shock that Ed’s gone (Last dance for Balls as he steps out of Strictly, 28 November)? Perhaps the voters who challenged the system by backing someone with little expertise beyond buffoonery withdrew their support when they realised where it might lead. Strangely comforting.
John Cranston
Norwich
• If the US president-elect backs down on his promise to build a wall on the Mexican border perhaps he could construct a Trump-l’oeil instead (The billionaire cowboy builder, G2, 28 November).
David Griffith
London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
I remember when my relationship to money changed. I was a freshman college student with a little extra money from my grants and scholarships. Before I knew it, I was eating at the fanciest restaurants in town. This was the beginning of my “treat yo’ self” journey. In my freshman year, I spent at least $3,000 just eating out.
I was raised by a single mother who worked three jobs to provide me and my brothers with everything we needed and most of what we wanted. Growing up, there never was a large focus on financial literacy or prepping for my future. Now, I wish there had been.
I didn’t shop that much but eating out and traveling effectively diminished all my extra funds. Through a tough biomedical course load and a few tough semesters, I was forced to pick up more jobs to make up for the money I lost in scholarships. Towards the end of my college career I was working three jobs, seven days a week. I was knee-deep into my senior year. To say I was overwhelmed is an understatement.
I was exhausted and began to wonder why I worked so hard when I wasn’t seeing any rewards. Something had to change, and I decided that it would be my lifestyle. The treat yo’ self mindset was intoxicating. It felt like I was having a bubble bath with a nice glass of wine every time I swiped my little piece of plastic. I swore I could feel the release of endorphins every time I purchased something.
Soon, I went from eating out lavishly to shopping. I figured that if I was going to spend the money, I might as well be able to look in my closet and see the fruits of my labor. This is where my love affair with clothing and fashion began. I wanted to change my closet up and I took full advantage. As far as I was concerned, I was just getting an early start to the rest of the way I wanted to live my life.
This was also the time that I got my first credit card. It was a Discover because I had very little credit as a college student. At first it was only used for emergencies, but as money dwindled my credit card became my security blanket – always there to catch my newest purchase.
This brings me to the present day. After a tough last two years and a job transition, I was forced to dip into my 401k just to keep afloat. I’m not alone. African Americans are three times more likely to tap into their 401k or retirement plans to meet immediate financial needs.
Currently, I have six credit cards, three of which were attained in the last two years. They range from my old, faithful Discover to a furniture store card, two additional credit cards and two more store cards. My debt has ballooned from a minuscule few hundred dollars to a staggering $15,000+, not including my student loans. My debt has become my dirty little secret.
Now that I’m 25 and wanting to expand educationally, professionally and personally, I find my debt holding me back. Around 72% of black women are the main breadwinners in their households. That’s why I feel now that it is more crucial than ever to get my financial life right, especially if I want to have a family one day.
My current financial situation is preventing me from pursuing my dream of buying and renovating a house, from investing and preparing from the future and stopping me from traveling. I see more and more every day that financial literacy is not just useful but is critical.
I’ve become a member of various financial literacy programs focused on making knowledge and information about budgeting and saving accessible and mainstream. Still, I struggle daily with making positive choices to ensure my financial future. I know that, because this lifestyle habit took years to develop it will also take years to change.
On Saturday domestic gas and electricity supplier GB Energy announced it was ceasing to trade. The move leaves 160,000 customers in limbo. What happens next for them – and rest of us
None of the small “challenger” energy firms that supply gas and electricity actually produce it – instead they buy it on the wholesale market, add a margin, and sell it on to customers, usually via one of the price comparison websites.
Since launching three years ago, GB Energy had been offering some of the cheapest tariffs in order to grab market share. It gathered 160,000 customers relatively quickly.
The problem is that the management were caught out by wholesale prices rises. The company, which Guardian Money had expressed reservations about this time last year, was not forward-buying enough of its energy and was therefore vulnerable to wholesale price rises. Ultimately, it was probably supplying energy to some households for less that it was paying its suppliers.
Many in the industry have been predicting that a small supplier would go bust in exactly this way. It remains to be seen whether any other small suppliers with similar business models will follow suit.
What happens if I am a GB Energy customer?
Nothing yet – your lights and central heating will continue to come on as if nothing had happened. Behind the scenes, the energy regulator Ofgem is currently in negotiations to appoint what is known as a “supplier of last resort”, a company to which all GB Energy’s customers will be moved en-mass, probably sometime next week.
Last month the regulator rather fortuitously announced it had put in place a safety net to guarantee that any customer who had built up a big credit balance with their supplier won’t lose out.
Domestic energy customers can often be hundreds of pounds in credit at this time of the year, ahead of the peak winter usage period when bills are much higher. Ofgem is looking to appoint a supplier that will in effect honour any credit that GB Energy customers have built up – in return for effectively scooping 160,000 customers.
This looks a tall order given the liability – if half its customers were £300 in credit this equates to £24m. If no supplier will take on the liability, then a levy will be placed on all suppliers to fund this sum, equal to around £1 a household.
Affected GB Energy customers who have not yet taken meter readings should do so. Ofgem will manage the transfer behind the scenes, and has confirmed that no customer will lose out as a result of this.
Almost certainly. The deal to which GB customers will be moved is unlikely to be one of the cheapest on the market. Most likely it will be on the chosen energy supplier’s standard tariff, which typically cost around £1,100 a year for average consumption – around £250 a year more than the cheapest deals out there.
There is nothing to stop customers then moving supplier from Ofgem’s chosen firm, but the advice is to wait until the “last resort” switch has taken place, particularly if you have a credit balance as you could lose that by switching directly now.
I’m with a small supplier – is mine at risk?
It could be. The challenger suppliers do well when wholesale prices fall, but struggle when the opposite happens. The last supplier to go bust was Energy4Business, which collapsed in 2008. In the past few years wholesales prices have been on the side of the small suppliers, but over the past 12 months they have gone up around 50%, albeit from a very low base, and there will be some very nervous finance directors at a number of smaller suppliers this morning.
Seasoned industry expert Doug Stewart, who runs supplier Green Energy UK, says he fears the collapse could be the first of many, if there is a harsh winter. “The closure of GB Energy is as a result of loss-making tariffs coming home to roost. You can’t make losses without having cash to cover them, and when that cash is coming from upfront payments made by customers, the whole pack of cards comes tumbling down when growth slows or stops. There’s nothing left in the bank to pay the creditors, and the customers’ money is all gone,” he says.
Technically there is no reason to avoid the challenger suppliers, as if yours goes bust, you as a consumer won’t lose out. That said, lots of switching households will be even less keen now to switch to a firm they have never heard of. The cheapest current average dual fuel deals cost around £850, but few buyers will have heard of the suppliers.
With the cheapest big six supplier tariffs now costing around £880-£890, many buyers will decide that the extra cost of moving to an established firm could be worth paying.
Tens of millions of workers under the age of 55 could be affected by changes to pension age sooner than previously planned, according to a former minister.
Steve Webb, pensions minister in the coalition government between 2010-15, says documents produced by the Department of Work and Pensions suggest the government is preparing a “more aggressive” timetable on state pension age changes.
We have been following the conversation you’ve been having in the comments. Here’s a roundup of your views – you can click on the links below to expand the discussion or to get involved yourself.
Share your views at the original article, here.
It is a sad fact of office life that the high point of the working day, second only to the utterly glorious bit where you get to go home, is lunch. Somehow a morning of meetings and pointless paperwork can seem almost worth it for a few minutes alone with your Tupperware, quietly going through your ex’s tasteless wedding photos – until a box of fried chicken or a Lean Cuisine curry wafts past, spoiling your gastronomic moment with the all-pervading scent of complete and unabashed rudeness. Eating smelly food at your desk is tantamount to sticking two greasy fingers up at your co-workers – and then wiping them clean on their mouse mats.
Two-thirds of Britons now eat our lunches “al desko” (a phrase that makes this statistic all the more depressing, somehow) most days of the week and, according to a recent survey for the interior landscaping firm Ambius (which may, I suspect, have an interest in redesigning our working environment), half of office workers judge colleagues who choose particularly aromatic food as antisocial. It’s hard not to see this as having a negative effect on productivity – if you’re still boiling with rage at someone for that sardine curry, you’re hardly going to bust a gut to meet their sales targets for the afternoon, or go the extra mile to help them out on an urgent project.
Caroline Craig and Sophie Missing, authors of the definitive guide to the office feast, the Little Book of Lunch, agree smelly food is a problem: “In every office, there is always at least one employee who flouts the staffroom etiquette and microwaves something so pungent, it permeates the whole building’s vents for hours.” However, they acknowledge that sometimes smelly packed lunches are unavoidable – “so if you’ve got smoked haddock chowder to heat up, then for God’s sake do it quickly, then eat it outside on a park bench”.
Not all foods are created equally offensive, of course; hot food smells more strongly, and smelly food that you can hear being slurped or crunched supplies a double whammy of queasy irritation. So where does your lunch come in the hierarachy of shame?
The worst. Even if you close your eyes and breathe through your mouth, you can still hear this lot being consumed through the simmering sound of your own rage. Enjoy only if you’re planning to resign in the next half hour: onion soup (slurp), cheesy chilli nachos (crunch), instant noodles (ugh), garlic bread (basically a P45 in baguette form).
Heat causes molecules in food to move around faster, which means more of them will reach your nose. Best consumed outside in a wide open space: curry of any variety, any brassicas (school dinner alert), fast food, fish, particularly oily fish such as kippers, which could land you in a tribunal.
Enjoy with the window wide open, and only if your deskmate is listening to loud metal over headphones: cheese and onion crisps, crusty tuna rolls, any hipster sandwiches containing kimchi.
Best saved for when the rest of your team has popped to the shops: tuna salad, ripe brie sandwiches, hard-boiled eggs, tinned fish.
Eat when your deskmate is busy on the phone: apples, carrot sticks, ready-salted crisps, nuts, crunchy salads.
Eat as much as you like, when you like: chocolate bars, yoghurt, cucumber sandwiches.
Huge numbers of VAT fraudsters are illegally selling goods tax-free to British shoppers on Amazon and eBay this Christmas, despite new government efforts to crack down on this ballooning £1bn VAT evasion crisis.
A Guardian investigation found a wide variety of popular goods being illegally sold without VAT on Britain’s leading shopping sites. They range from cheap Christmas tree lights, electric toothbrushes and thermal socks to expensive laptops, iPads, music keyboards, violins and pingpong tables.
In some cases, VAT fraudsters offer unbeatable prices. Mostly, however, their prices remain in line with law-abiding competitors and the proceeds of evasion disappear overseas, often to China.
Guardian investigations found many tax-evading sellers were trading without displaying VAT numbers on Amazon or eBay. Others were showing made up numbers, or numbers cloned, without authorisation, from unsuspecting legitimate businesses.
Several sellers purported to be operating through UK trading companies, but checks showed these firms had been dissolved, sometimes years earlier. None responded to questions about VAT.
HMRC estimates the explosion in VAT fraud on Britain’s shopping websites will cost £1bn to £1.5bn in lost VAT revenues this year, with much of it going missing in the current festive period.
By the end of “Cyber Monday”. UK shoppers will have spent £6.77bn on the web in a seven-day shopping binge that peaked on Black Friday, according to online retail association IMRG. The number of parcels ordered online will be up 12% on last year, it estimates.
The market for many goods is now dominated by overseas sellers. On eBay, for example, 40% of UK sales of Android phones are to firms registered in China. Meanwhile, Chinese-based companies account for more than 60% of sales of Christmas tree fairy lights on eBay.co.uk.
There is no suggestion that Amazon or eBay have themselves evaded tax, but critics claim they could make some basic changes – such as requiring sellers to display valid VAT numbers – that would help to stop their websites being used by many overseas companies as a platform for industrial-scale fraud.
Both eBay and Amazon insist that it is not their responsibility to police tax compliance among sellers. VAT rules are complex but the tax generally applies to most goods supplied from locations in the UK even if the seller company is incorporated overseas. Shoppers typically see prices that include VAT, charged on most goods at the standard rate of 20%.
Amazon told the Guardian: “Marketplace sellers are independent businesses responsible for complying with their own VAT obligations.” It added that Amazon does offer tools sellers can use to help with tax compliance, but “we don’t have the authority to review their tax affairs”.
EBay said it would pass information from the Guardian’s investigation to HMRC: “If we are informed by HMRC that a seller is not complying with requirements then we will take appropriate action.” A spokesperson said eBay “continually reminds” sellers of their need to comply with the law and had recently warned overseas firms of the UK government’s efforts to deal with VAT fraud.
After the Guardian first highlighted rife VAT evasion on online shopping sites, HMRC launched a series of warehouse raids, seizing £500,000 of goods. Months later, the then chancellor George Osborne gave tax inspectors new powers which he said demonstrated “firm action to protect the UK market from unfair online competition [from overseas VAT evaders]”.
Under the new rules, HMRC now has the power to issue Amazon and eBay with warning notices about suspected VAT fraudsters using their sites. If they then fail to take action, Amazon and eBay can be held liable for any VAT that later goes missing.
In reality, however, these changes have had little impact and VAT evasion remains widespread. A spokesperson for VATfraud.org, a campaign group set up by UK-based sellers, said: “Despite the new laws, HMRC have shown a woeful lack of action. There are many fraudsters who were reported to HMRC years ago but are still trading, and evading VAT, today.”
Guardian investigations found Amazon even offering extensive support services at its British warehouses to overseas sellers that were doing little to mask their VAT evasion.
As well as advertising these sellers’ goods on Amazon.co.uk, it holds items in Amazon UK warehouses, arranges delivery to addresses across Britain, and deals with complaints and returned goods.
Amazon warehouse staff even offer gift-wrapping services on behalf of the fraudster sellers.
There is no suggestion Amazon or eBay knowingly facilitate specific fraudulent VAT-free sales, but the two US groups are nevertheless well aware that evasion in online shopping is a major problem.
Meanwhile, the sellers themselves are often based overseas, with little or nothing known about their UK sales activities by HMRC.
One such seller, a company based in Dubai, offered an iPad Air 2 for sale on Amazon.co.uk.
The iPad was sold at £456.68, which was a similar price to that on offer at Apple’s own online store. However, the Apple store price included a £78.17 VAT charge while the Dubai-based Amazon seller charged no VAT at all.
Asked for a VAT receipt, the iPad seller said in an email: “We don’t supply UK VAT receipt, sorry.”
Many sellers contacted by the Guardian were similarly open about not charging VAT. “Thank you for your letter and sorry to tell you we do not have UK VAT receipt. We are located in China,” said one. “Our VAT is still in the application,” said another.
A third seller even offered to cut a deal, offering to share part of the proceeds of the VAT fraud. “If you want the VAT receipt, it will be after your purchase a week later. Otherwise, we will offer some discount to you directly,” the seller said in an email. “Looking forward to your reply.”
A former director of an NHS trust is suing Jeremy Hunt for religious discrimination after he was effectively barred from applying for positions following his public opposition to gay adoption.
Richard Page has lodged a claim at the employment tribunal, saying his televised comments in 2015 that it was in the best interests of a child to have a mother and father stemmed from his Christian faith.
His remarks led to him being sacked as a magistrate in March for serious misconduct, after 15 years on the bench. Two years earlier, the lord chancellor and lord chief justice reprimanded Page after finding his religious beliefs, rather than evidence, had influenced his decisions during a family court hearing.
Page, 70, was also a non-executive director at the Kent and Medway NHS and social care partnership trust. In March, following a complaint by the trust’s LGBT staff network, Page was suspended for the final three months of his four-year term in office.
In August, the NHS Termination of Appointments Panel told Page “it was not in the interests of the health service for you to serve as a non-executive director in the NHS”, in effect barring him from applying for directorships in the future.
Page, a former NHS manager from Headcorn, Kent, is bringing a claim against the health secretary and NHS Improvement, which has the power to appoint non-executive directors. He is pursuing a similar case against the lord chancellor over his sacking as a magistrate.
In a TV debate on Christians in public life in March 2015, Page said: “My responsibility as a magistrate, as I saw it, was to do what I considered best for the child, and my feeling was therefore that it would be better if it was a man and woman who were the adopted parents.”
In a video on the website of Christian Concern, which is backing his case, Page denied he was homophobic and claimed that more than 6,500 emails had been sent to the Kent NHS trust in his support against one complaint “from the LGBT people”.
He said: “This is the second public sector organisation that has got rid of me. This, I feel, is completely wrong because it’s discriminatory against my opinions and the fact I was doing what I considered to be right.
“The political correctness makes people be frightened, or makes them think they’re the only ones that believe this way, and yet they obviously are the majority … There are people standing up against the so-called politically correct views.”
Andrea Minichiello Williams, of Christian Concern, said freedoms in the UK were being “catastrophically eroded by political correctness and fear”.
“The comment that a child needs a mother and a father is a belief held by Christians, and many others around the world. Everything that Richard Page does, his whole belief system is rooted in his Christian faith. Beliefs arising from the Christian faith continue to be lawful beliefs in our country.”
She said government assurances that equality legislation would not lead to the removal of people who expressed Christian views while holding public positions had turned out to be baseless.
“If it is possible to suffer the detriment of losing your position at work for expressing lawful Christian views, the situation is crucial. There is, in effect, a religious bar to office for Christians solely; those politically correct institutions would not do the same to other faiths.”
A spokesperson for NHS Improvement said: “We are unable to comment on ongoing court cases.”
The ‘challenger’ energy firm had 160,000 customers, many of whom are in credit. Here’s the lowdown
There is a popular misconception that becoming a landlord is purely a monetary decision, complemented by the myth that the only task involved is counting the never-ending flow of money, then deciding how to spend or hoard it. My decision to move into this profession was driven by a number of factors, none of which related to it being a supposedly lucrative occupation.
I bailed out of the business world at the relatively young age of 30 after one too many conflicts, my fiery temperament and straight-talking approach ruffling more than a few feathers. However, each job move during my short and turbulent career had created a small pot of severance pay and in the pre-bubble days of the London property market this was sufficient to put down a deposit each time and build up a small portfolio.
Working for myself, managing a portfolio without the need to consult others and play politics, turned out to be much better suited to my personality. I like the challenge of being CEO, marketing director, construction manager, interior designer, concierge, and yes, general dogsbody, all at once. It’s simplistic to look at the wealth I have created and think I have ruthlessly accumulated without consideration for others. But with no pension to speak of and the desire to provide for my children, I am proud to have this business to safeguard our futures.
However, the real passion that inspired me to enter a business that is much tougher than most imagine, is a love of period properties. I have no idea where it came from, but the moment I see a house with intricate mouldings, parquet floors or other character features, my heart starts to race just thinking about how it could look once restored. Typically, a single project takes 18 months from start to finish – and many, many sleepless nights.
Inspiring as it has been to have an interesting niche, the day-to-day work is often highly repetitive, with all too frequent peaks of stress. For every hour consumed with choosing a new sofa, vintage rug, or flicking through an interior design magazine, there are 30 spent dealing with an endless stream of leaking showers, malfunctioning boilers, blocked gutters, not to mention moaning tenants, reluctant builders, arrogant architects and tedious government regulations. Invariably, a crisis appears in the most inopportune moments – there is rarely such a thing as a weekend off.
It is understandable to see tenants as powerless victims, subject to the whims of their landlord’s commercial agenda, but it can and does cut both ways. Most tenants are genuinely decent people and simply want a nice place to live, but as in all walks of life some are capricious, irresponsible and even blatantly dishonest.
Illegal sub-lettings are a constant bane. Serious maintenance problems have built up over months then are casually mentioned in passing in a belated monosyllabic communication. In 25 years I can count on one hand the number of times a tenant has confessed willingly to property damage and offered to pay or fix it. Many wish to instantly break contracts when it is no longer convenient for them to live there.
A tenant’s failure to pay rent is usually a rare occurrence, but when it does happen it’s crucial to treat the problem sensitively rather than instantly reach for the lawyer’s phone number. There is often a personal or economic problem causing the arrears and once this is understood a solution can usually be found. One tenant who had been renting from me for five years lost their job and started drinking heavily. I found out that they had borrowed substantially to finance several months’ rent while out of work. The situation could not go on. We chatted extensively and through a combination of a rent moratorium, shortening of the contract and the promise of an excellent reference, an amicable solution was found.
It would be hypocritical of me not to sometimes feel a twinge of guilt owning numerous properties while a younger generation struggles to get their foot on the ladder. However, building up the portfolio has been my life’s work and I have poured a huge amount of time, energy, passion and money into it – a process which never stops. A vibrant city economy such as London needs a good quality stock of rental properties to meet its citizens’ frequently changing circumstances. It does frustrate me hugely reading about “slum” landlords with their ruthless commercial practices, or speculative buy-to-let investors gobbling up soulless new builds furnished with cheap cookie-cutter interiors for maximum commercial gain. I have to accept that it is part of the business I am in to be tarred with the same brush.
Controversial as Airbnb and its counterparts are, they are a game-changer that is here to stay. I branched out into more short-term arrangements three years ago. Even the best long-term tenant gets a little jaded after a while in the treatment of your properties, so it has been a breath of fresh air dealing with guests who are genuinely thrilled to rent from your portfolio. The other plus is that with shorter rental periods, the bad guests usually leave before they have time to do much damage.
Such short-term lets have been criticised as some kind of cash cow but the amount of work involved in even a single rental is breathtaking. The property maintenance and cleaning has to compete with a five-star hotel and you are in constant touch with guests at all times of the day and night. Fail in any of this and your rating plummets and the property will sink without trace on the listings. You habitually feel like an insecure, over-sensitive actor as you pore over the latest review.
It has also created interesting new scenarios with some bookings not quite what they seem. With the elegant period-style interiors I utilise, the temptation to rent them for more salubrious motives is too much for some guests. One of my first bookings comprised of five guests doing a photoshoot for a magazine. Although I politely requested “no porn” prior to booking, a pretty model proceeded to run around the patio of the building wearing only lingerie, to the delight of the elderly residents.
Others have surreptitiously used my properties for commercial purposes, paying a fraction of the commercial rate of an official location. It is a cat-and-mouse game trying to spot them. However the majority of guests are lovely and have allowed me to recover a sense of pride in what I do, given all the negative publicity frequently surrounding landlords. The schadenfreude from giving overpriced, bland corporate hotel chains a kick in the teeth is an added plus.
As I sit in my home office at 7am and deal with a leaking shower tray in an Edwardian house for the eighth time in nine years, it is easy to fantasise about a profession with less daily drudgery and more stability. It can also be wearying being responsible for the accommodation for typically 20 people every day and night, 365 days of the year. But as a new booking comes in from Beijing or Berlin, or the photos arrive from a recently executed renovation, a surge of adrenalin kicks in and I am ready to face the day’s challenges.
• Are you a zero-hours worker, a novelist, or a Father Christmas impersonator? We want to hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your story anonymously here
A couple of years ago my husband and I were travelling in south-east Asia, and a Filipino family welcomed us into their humble home and we had an amazing time getting to know them.
Fast forward to last month and I’d sent the children a large parcel of books, toys, art supplies and clothes, worth around £100. I used Parcel Monkey – big mistake! The parcel arrived in the country, but the courier then sent an email to say there was a customs charge and the item would be returned to the UK in three days unless paid. It couldn’t tell me how much it was, so I asked them not to return it while I sorted out any payment due. I emailed the family who said the charge was around £20, which they couldn’t afford, so I immediately sent them the money via Western Union.
When they went to pay, however, the parcel had already been sent back to the UK. Parcel Monkey is refusing to resend the item or refund me the £101.02 it cost to send in the first place. It was a gift for people who are very poor and were so looking forward to it.
Parcel Monkey did not respond to my message about holding the parcel, while its online support is a joke and each time someone different fobs me off. AW, Colchester, Essex
Parcel Monkey is an agency, meaning its business model involves sub-contracting out to local courier companies – customers are invited to choose which one – but over which it has no direct control. Delays with customs, meawhile, can extend predicted deadlines.
The company confirmed that the return of the parcel to the UK was due to unpaid customs duty in the Philippines. DHL (the actual courier company) attempted collection of the duty, but as this was refused by the receiver the item was returned.
A Parcel Monkey spokesman said that both it and DHL had acted in good faith, but he understood why you felt frustrated by events “beyond our control”. He went on: “We, or the carrier selected by our customers, do not have control over international customs and if the time frames are not met, items will be returned. I can confirm that we will return the item back to AW at our own expense as a gesture of goodwill.”
Thankfully this happened, and you reshipped the item directly with DHL.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Alex spent £675 on a washing machine and a fridge-freezer from Littlewoods, opting to “buy now pay later”. At the time his income was sufficient to make the repayments before the end of the interest-free period, but when he was suddenly made redundant he couldn’t afford to repay the debt in time, and then an interest rate of 39% kicked in.
“Suddenly the payments went up from about £130 to £250 a month and I didn’t have the cash,” he says. “Buy now pay later seemed the easy option, but looking back I should have just saved up the money for a couple of months. It was naivety on my part.”
Alex sought advice from debt charity StepChange, and with its help reached an agreement with Littlewoods. In total he repaid £1,130, nearly twice the amount he borrowed. “I will never have a catalogue debt again,” he says, “If I want something I’ll save up for it.”
Alex’s difficulties were compounded by the fact that interest rates on goods bought from catalogues tend to be higher than those on mainstream credit. At this time of year it can be tempting to use these firms to buy Christmas gifts, but finance experts warn that if you’re not going to pay off your borrowing quickly, you could end up paying a high price.
Traditional catalogues such as Freemans and Littlewoods have been around for decades. They allowed customers to shop at home and spread the cost with a range of payment options. The rise of the internet means these brands now operate online, and have been joined by a host of catalogue-style firms selling clothes, gadgets, gifts and furniture.
The catalogue companies typically offer customers incentives to open “personal accounts” with a discount off their first order or free delivery. Account holders are then offered various options to spread the cost of their purchases. Recently, comparison website Money.co.uk described the cost of catalogue credit from some suppliers as “clear as mud”. It warned that in some cases catalogues were charging three times the typical credit card APR of 22.8%.
Among the biggest firms, Very.co.uk charges a typical interest rate of 39.9%; JD Williams (which owns Jacamo, SimplyBe, Fifty Plus, and others) 58.7%; Studio 48.9%; Look Again (owners of Kaleidoscope, Witt International and Curvissa) 34.9%; and Argos 29.9%.
“Buy now pay later”, or BNPL, is a common option. Borrowers who pay the entire bill within the stipulated timescale, normally three, six or 12 months, pay no interest at all. Managed well, this can be a great way to borrow. But if your personal circumstances change and you run into problems, or you just miss a payment, it can cost you dear. If you fail to pay off your borrowing in time the interest is usually backdated to day one – not the date the interest-free period ended.
Headteacher Jacquie Sainsbury recently learned this the hard way. She has been a Very customer for five years, always making her repayments before interest kicked in. However, when she recently attempted to settle a £1,621 balance a power cut meant her debit card payment wasn’t processed and she missed the deadline. Very charges a typical APR of 39.9%, and interest at this rate – £644 – was applied to her account. She asked Very for leniency given that she had tried to make the payment, but the matter is yet to be resolved.
A spokesperson for Shop Direct, which owns Very, says: “Our BNPL options, at terms of six, nine or 12 months, allow customers to budget by making payments of any amount at any time to suit them, and avoid interest by paying the full cash price of the item before the end of the BNPL period. The APRs we offer are competitive, and are based on customers’ individual circumstances and their credit risk profiles.”
Very also offers “low monthly payments” as an option, allowing customers to “take as long as they like” by paying the minimum each month: £5 or 7% of their account balance. But a customer doing this would take five-and-half years to repay a £500 debt, paying £314 in interest in the process. Paying £100 a month instead of the minimum would mean the debt was repaid in six months, with an interest bill of £48.
In comparison, if you borrowed £500 on a mainstream credit card charging 18.29% and repaid £100 a month, you’d pay just £23 in interest over six months.
Jane Tully, director of external affairs at the Money Advice Trust, says the wording “take as long as you like” sends entirely the wrong message. “It could lead to customers paying a large amount of interest, even on a relatively small debt. This language should be changed as a matter of urgency.”
The trust is one of several debt charities warning about the high cost of catalogue debt. Its research shows an estimated 1.9 million people used catalogue credit to buy Christmas presents in 2015. About one in 10 callers to the National Debtline, the charity’s free advice service, have problems with catalogue debt.
Shop Direct also owns Littlewoods. Its customers can “spread the cost” with at least 20 weeks’ interest-free borrowing. After that interest kicks in, although the Littlewoods website doesn’t display the representative rate. A spokesperson told The Observer that the rate depends on the individual customer’s circumstances, but that only a minority choose to arrange their repayments so that they attract interest. “The majority pay the full cash price before the interest opt-out period is over. The most common rate of interest for those that do pay interest on BNPL transactions is 44.9%.”
Grattan was the only company The Observer came across that provided a worked example of the cost implications of not repaying a BNPL deal in time. It states: “Failure to pay a £200 debt in 12 months incurs an interest charge of £60.69, and the new balance of £260.69 then incurs interest at a typical rate of 34.9% until repaid.”
Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms says many people wouldn’t buy things from catalogues if they were aware of the potential cost. “Because the interest charges are applied over multiple weeks or months, the customer loses track of how much they are actually paying back,” he says. “Much like payday loans and credit builder-type credit cards, the interest rates are high because the default rates and non-payment issues are more common than with mainstream credit.”
StepChange says 36% of its clients have catalogue debt, with the average amount owed standing at more than £2,000 – and rising. “Catalogue credit can be an extremely expensive way to shop if people cannot afford to pay it off quickly or they miss payments,” says spokesman Edward Ware. “People need to think carefully about whether credit is the right option for their shopping, before searching for the best deal and deciding whether they can afford to pay off the balance before interest starts to mount up.”
If you fall behind on catalogue repayments, don’t stick your head in the sand. It’s vital to get in touch with your creditors and explain your situation. A debt adviser can help you work out a payment based on a pro-rata distribution of your available income – this means you offer all your creditors a fair share of what you can afford to pay. You can also ask for any interest and charges to be frozen.
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I work as a European grants manager. My position, although probably OK for the next couple of years, doesn’t have a future in post-Brexit Britain. To add to this, I don’t particularly enjoy the job and it isn’t a career I would have chosen. I did an arts degree and took temping work in the public sector to pay the bills alongside the unpaid or poorly paid work I was doing for a small theatre company.
Nearly 10 years later, I feel stuck in this line of work but my field is drying up fast and will probably end as our ties with the EU are severed. Along the way, I have had experience in project management, financial planning, communication, training, events and marketing, but transferable skills seem to be a thing of the past and the creative sector I long to work in seems to be a tightly guarded door.
Taking a pay cut isn’t viable with my current mortgage payments and although I have looked into getting some career coaching, the costs are out of my reach and the results seem to be hit and miss.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally. 
Rail passengers could be given a boost under government plans to make it clearer which is the cheapest ticket option available to them.
Ministers are planning an overhaul of the complex train ticketing system, under which many passengers end up paying more than is necessary for their travel. It is understood that rail firms face being ordered to redesign thousands of station ticket machines as part of the measures, which are due to be announced next month.
“Rail passengers must be able to trust that they are getting the best possible deal every time they travel and we are working with industry partners and consumer experts to identify improvements which could be brought in quickly across the network,” said the Department for Transport (DfT).
“We want a simpler, more modern and passenger-focused fares and ticketing system which takes advantage of all the benefits of new technology. Progress has been made, including an announcement earlier this week of £80m to accelerate the roll-out of smart ticketing across the network.”
It is understood that ministers are considering forcing rail operators to alert passengers who are using station ticket machines or buying from the ticket office if there is a cheaper way to make their journey.
Under the ticketing settlement agreement of 1995, train operators are only obliged to tell customers of the most suitable ticket for their journey.
A source indicated that the government was believed to be planning to order firms to be more consistent on conditions, such as peak time restrictions, attached to tickets.
According to the Times, passengers travelling between London and Birmingham are offered more than 40 different fares and there are an estimated 16m different train fares available on the UK’s rail network.
The paper reported that different self-service machines inside the same train station offer vastly different fares for the same journey, meaning some passengers end up paying more.
Stephen Joseph, executive director of the Campaign for Better Transport, told the paper: “There are 16m fares on the national rail database … anything that makes the system more transparent is very welcome, but this must go further and look at the real fundamentals of the ticketing system.”
A spokesman for the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators, said: “We want rail customers to get the best possible deal every time. We’re making it easier and quicker for people to pay to travel by train with smarter ticketing, and we want to speed up improvements that will mean simpler, clearer fares that people can trust.”
The government may be preparing to increase the official state pension age to 70 for millions of people currently in their 20s, a former minister has claimed.
Steve Webb said documents produced by the Department for Work and Pensions suggested a “more aggressive” timetable on state pension age (SPA) increases than previously planned was being prepared.