nly by implication.
Eadie said parliament had already intervened in the areas of treaties and decided – in the 2010 Constitutional Reform and Governance Act – what prerogatives should exist.
But referring to the way in which the UK entered what was then the European Economic Community, both Lord Neuberger and Lord Wilson pointed out that parliament and the government had worked together in 1972.
“If entry was the result of a joint effort, should our departure [from the EU] also not be so,” Wilson inquired.
Neuberger said: “Parliament did its bit in passing the 1972 act. It was very much a joint affair. Whereas on [the government’s] argument, our withdrawal will not be a joint effort.”
The European Union (Amendment) Act 2008 was a review of parliamentary powers over relations with the EU, Eadie said. It even mentioned article 50 in its introductory notes but, Eadie continued, “parliament’s intention was to leave article 50 well alone. Parliament chose not to extend its explicit powers to include withdrawal from the EU.”
Turning to the 2015 legislation that authorised the EU referendum, Eadie acknowledged it did not explicitly explain how the result should be put into effect.
But that did not mean the act was, as the high court ruled, “legally irrelevant”, he said. It implied that the royal prerogative should be used to implement withdrawal.
“Was parliament in 2015 really in setting up the referendum doing nothing more than simply reserving to itself the right to leave the EU?” he asked. “Not merely is it highly improbable, but that would run counter to the repeated statements of ministers and the government.”
In his opening remarks, the president of the supreme court said none of the parties involved in the case had asked any of the 11 justices to stand down before the hearing.
Neuberger’s comments, made after fiercely critical coverage from pro-Brexit newspapers, reflects the court’s determination to assert its impartiality in the proceedings.
“It is right to record that, at the direction of the court, the registrar has asked all the parties involved in these proceedings whether they wish to ask any of the justices to stand down,” he explained. “Without exception, all parties to the appeal have stated that they have no objection to any of us sitting on this appeal.”
He also reminded the media that the names of some of the former claimants and their families should not be identified because of online abuse.
“We have made this order largely because various individuals have received threats of serious violence and unpleasant abuse in emails and other electronic communications,” Neuberger said.
“Threatening and abusing people because they are exercising their fundamental right to go to court undermines the rule of law. Anyone who communicates such threats or abuse should be aware that there are legal powers designed to ensure that access to the courts is available to everyone.”
There are so many lawyers, journalists and members of the public in court that some of the barristers and solicitors taking part have had to sit in neighbouring courts, watching the hearing by live video link.
A handful of demonstrators gathered outside the court, some carrying union flags, as the dense legal argument probing the significance of past cases continued. Scores of police officers were on patrol outside the court in Parliament Square. There was no sign of any trouble.
Attacks on the upper middle class composition and presumed (right wing) political leanings of the judiciary used to be the preserve of the left.
Now the attacks on the mono-social class of senior judges and their presumed (pro-European Union) political leanings are being waged from the right.
The Daily Mail, in particular, has worked itself up into a fury about the matter, which means, of course, that its editor-in-chief, Paul Dacre, has done so.
One of his key complaints is that judges are unelected, as is the other major group of Brexit oppositionists, members of the House of Lords.
I don’t recall Dacre - or his employer, Viscount Rothermere - standing for election. They rely instead on pointing to the fact that their large newspaper audience gives them a mandate, and that they speak for them.
In fact, according to the latest National Readership Survey, the Mail is read by about 3.35m adults every day. Given that the current UK population is 64m, the Mail’s reach is barely 5%.
But the paper’s influence is far greater than those figures suggest. Why? Partly, because its audience contains a sizeable chunk of society’s major opinion-formers. And partly, maybe mainly, because we, the competing media, help to publicise it.
Media is obsessed with media. And, before you click to make the obvious point, I am, by the nature of my media commentating role, one of the guilty parties.
We police each other and, in so doing, we promote each other. Broadcasters, whether on TV or radio, live off newspaper content. Social media is the most promiscuous of press parasites.
It means that the Mail carries weight out of all proportion to its audience (and don’t be fooled by the Mail Online numbers: people don’t read that website for the paper’s political output).
The point is that the Mail’s views are known far beyond its regular readership. It is also influential because, like it or not, and Guardian readers generally do not, the Mail is good at what it does. Good, you might say, at being bad.
It long ago eclipsed the Sun as the major Fleet Streeet agenda-setter. It is the outstanding paper of this generation and other right-of-centre papers - the Sun, Daily Telegraph and Daily Express - acknowledge that fact by singing from its hymn book.
Whether consciously or unconsciously, they pick up on its general approach to the politics of the day, echoing its opinions and offering tacit support to its campaigns of vilification.
I am sure a larger number of Sun readers voted for Brexit than Mail readers. Sun editor Tony Gallagher has no time for the European Union and his paper campaigned unrelentingly for leave during the EU referendum campaign
But the whole tone of the media’s anti-Brexit crusade was forged in the Kensington headquarters of the Mail. And its chief architect was therefore Dacre.
Now, as fears of a possible Brexit breakdown loom, he is leading the assault on the judiciary. In Monday’s Mail, he ran a spread decrying the “secret” way in which the 11 judges are selected for Britain’s supreme court, comparing it unfavourably with the public selection of their US equivalents.
He also carried a leading article, in which it was argued that it is “utterly impossible” for the judges “to deliberate in a vacuum.”
Many people, and including many on the left, would have some sympathy for the view that the judicial selection process is too secretive.
I’m not sure, however, if we would benefit from adopting the US system of public grillings in the senate, which the Mail concedes to be a sometimes “ugly spectacle.”
Greater transparency about how the supreme court members are chosen would not be unwelcome, but do we want to select them on the basis of their political views?
That would surely lead to what happens in the States: the loading of the court to suit the politicians of the day, most notably the sitting president.
I suspect that that is exactly what the Mail wants, as its editorial polemic implies. Ever since the high court ruled that parliament had the right (and duty) to vote on Britain leaving the EU, the paper has ignored the reality of that decision having been made on a legal, not a political, basis.
So it now believes the supreme court will follow suit, contending that the 11 judges cannot possibly “be guided only by intellectual legalistic principles, divorcing themselves from the consequences of their decision.”
Then comes a wonderful example of tortured Mail logic. The judges cannot, says the paper, be “impervious to the political heat and fury surrounding their ruling.”
Which begs the question: who is responsible for generating most of “the political heat and fury”? And will the judges remain impervious to that?
All 11 of the UK’s most senior judges will take their seats on the supreme court bench on Monday to decide whether parliament or the government has the authority to trigger Brexit.
The four-day hearing on the divisive constitutional issue will be broadcast live, testing the public’s appetite for intricate legal argument, arcane vocabulary and historical precedents.
The “justices”, as supreme court judges are known, may still be pondering their conclusions as they digest their Christmas puddings; their eagerly awaited judgment is not expected to be delivered until January. 
Emotions are running high. Ukip has accused those behind the claim of being “arrogant federalists” intent on blocking Brexit, the Daily Mail has branded the high court judges who found against the government in the first round as “enemies of the people” and individual challengers – such as Gina Miller – have received death threats.
Nigel Farage’s pledge to lead a protest march of 100,000 Brexiters to the doors of the court may have receded, but the high-ceilinged courtroom will be packed with senior law officers and QCs from Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales as well as the rival claimants’ legal teams and interveners.
On Monday, Labour’s shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, said the political aspect of the case had been “hyped in parts of the media”. She said: “This is about process. It is not about outcomes.”
Chakrabarti told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It’s not just about doing it or not doing it. There are lots of questions to be decided about what happens next – how we live after Brexit, what our relationship will be with the remaining states of the European Union.”
She said it was unfair for newspapers to delve into the personal lives or supposed opinions of the judges.
“They have to be referees of the constitution,” she said. “If we start dragging these people through the media or through politics, putting them through a kind of political scrutiny – people like me are fair game, but the judges are not fair game. They cannot speak up for themselves. We all need them in the end if we’re going to settle our disputes in a civilised way in a courtroom.”
The panel of 11 justices is the largest ever assembled for a single case since the law lords were created in 1876. Such judicial mass mobilisation is recognition of the constitutional significance and political sensitivity of the hearing. 
The bench will be led by the president of the supreme court, Lord Neuberger, and his deputy, Lady Hale. There are 12 justices on the court but one has recently retired and is yet to be replaced. The court normally sits in panels of five; an odd number is always required to ensure there cannot be a tie. 
The court is housed in the neo-Tudor exuberance of what was once Middlesex County Hall, Westminster, opposite parliament. Its proceedings are less archaic than most crown courts: wigs are no longer worn and hearings are routinely broadcast live online. Most documents will be in digital versions. Daily transcripts of the hearing will be published.
The legal dispute is over who has authority to notify Brussels formally that Britain is withdrawing under article 50 of the treaty on European Union (TEU) – parliament or ministers.
Article 50 states that any member state may leave “in accordance with its own constitutional requirements”, an undefined term that has allowed both sides to pursue rival interpretations. The case has opened deep rifts in the consensus over the UK’s unwritten constitution.
Having lost by a three-nil ruling at the high court, there was speculation that the government would switch its argument on appeal and tell the court that article 50, which triggers Brexit, can be reversed at a future date by parliament. That would enable ministers to say that once triggered, MPs would have a subsequent opportunity to control the process.
Acknowledging that Brexit is not irrevocable would, however, be politically awkward for the prime minister and could risk the case being referred to the European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg, the EU’s highest court, for clarification of the treaty’s meaning.
Such a diversion – apart from handing European judges power over the most intimate working of the UK’s constitution – would delay Brexit for months. None of the main parties is eager for a referral to Luxembourg.
The justices are unlikely to want it either but may not be able to ignore the question entirely. Some of the appellants from Northern Ireland argue in their submission that “if the court feels that anything turns on this issue ... plainly it is an issue of EU law which should be referred to the court of justice of the European Union”.
Legal submissions are due to be opened by the attorney general for England and Wales, Jeremy Wright QC, who will outline the government’s argument that executive powers, inherited through what was once the royal prerogative, are sufficient to sign and authorise international treaties. 
The industrious James Eadie QC, whose work as “Treasury devil” requires him to be present at innumerable cases involving the government, will pick up the more detailed line of reasoning along with Jason Coppel QC. The Brexit secretary, David Davis MP, formally the respondent in the case, is not expected to be present in court.
As well as Wright, who is a Conservative MP, other senior law officers taking part include the counsel general for Wales, Mick Antoniw, who is a Labour member of the Welsh assembly, Scotland’s lord advocate, James Wolffe QC, and the attorney general for Northern Ireland, John Larkin QC.
The original challengers have retained a host of successful QCs to develop their assertion that the government cannot arbitrarily remove rights established through domestic legislation by executive decree. Parliamentary sovereignty, they maintain, is supreme.
• Gina Miller, a UK investment manager. She is represented by the law firm Mishcon de Reya, Lord Pannick QC and Rhodri Thompson QC.
The 51-year-old lead claimant was born in Guyana but became a UK citizen. Miller has received death threats. She denies that her challenge is aimed at reversing Brexit. 
She has commented: “All the people who have been saying ‘we need to take back control’, ‘we need sovereignty’, well you can’t have it with one hand and then with the other say, ‘I’m going to bypass it now and not seek consultation from the representatives in parliament’. You just can’t have it both ways.”
• Deir Tozetti Dos Santos, a hairdresser who holds UK and European citizenship, is represented by the law firm Edwin Coe, Dominic Chambers QC and Jessica Simor QC.
Dos Santos, 37, works at a salon in Belgravia, central London. He has kept a lower profile than Miller and has been targeted with online abuse. After winning the high court case, he told The Guardian: “I have never challenged the result of the referendum – in fact I voted for Brexit in the referendum for the sole reason that I wanted power to be returned from Europe to the British parliament.
“But I did not think it was right for government then just to bypass parliament and try to take away my legal rights without consulting parliament first ... In her speech to the Conservative party conference, the prime minister attacked me for bringing these proceedings as a claimant. She said I was trying to subvert democracy. That was an unwarranted and irresponsible attack.”
• The People’s Challenge, a crowdfunded initiative, represented by the law firm Bindmans, Helen Mountfield QC and Gerry Facenna QC. It is the first fully-funded claim on CrowdJustice to reach the supreme court. One of the leading activists is Grahame Pigney, who lives in France. “The rights and privileges of Britons [who live in Europe] didn’t figure in the Brexit debate. The referendum was advisory. It must go back to parliament ... as parliament has granted us these rights, it is for parliament to decide when, how and under what circumstances they are taken away.”
• AB and a child, represented by the law firm Bhatia Best and Manjit Gill QC. Brought on behalf of children whose right to residence in UK depends on their EU treaty rights.
• Fair Deal for Expats, a group formed by British expatriates living abroad in 10 EU states, represented by the law firm Crofts Solicitors and Patrick Green QC, has been given permission to intervene [join the case].
• Scotland’s lord advocate and Wales’s counsel general will be allowed to participate in the hearing.
• Aiden O’Neill QC, representing the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain, will argue that using the royal prerogative will undermine the “legislative competence” of the Scottish parliament.
• Lawyers for Great Britain, a pro-Brexit group led by Martin Howe QC, believe the result of the referendum should be implemented without further delay.
• Cases heard in Belfast on the constitutional impact of triggering article 50 will also be joined up to the dispute in the supreme court. The Northern Ireland attorney general, John Larkin QC, argues that the Good Friday peace agreement “has nothing to do with EU membership”. The unsuccessful challengers in the Belfast high court disagree with him.
Educated at Westminster School and studied chemistry at Oxford University, Lord Neuberger worked at a merchant bank before joining the bar. First judicial appointment as a recorder, a part time judge, in 1990. His wife’s pro-European tweets have led to Eurosceptic calls for him to stand aside from the case.
The most senior woman on the bench, studied law at Cambridge University, then lectured at Manchester University while practising as a barrister. She specialised in family and social welfare law, becoming a high court judge in 1994. A speech she delivered setting out the arguments ahead of the Article 50 case infuriated Brexiteers.
He read law at Oxford University and practised in Germany before becoming a recorder in 1993. He represented the UK on the Council of Europe’s Consultative Council of European Judges from 2000 to 2011. Lord Mance was forced to withdraw from giving a speech about justice in Europe in November because of political sensitivities ahead of the article 50 court case.
Formerly Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland, Kerr was educated at St Colman’s College, Newry, and read law at Queen’s University, Belfast. In 1993 he was appointed a high court judge. He was last the Law Lord appointed before the creation of the supreme court.
He specialised in maritime and commercial law at the bar and became a recorder in 1985. Clarke conducted the Marchioness and Bowbelle Inquiries and was appointed Master of the Rolls in 2005. He was the first justice to be appointed directly to the supreme court in 2009.
He read law at Oxford University and specialised in family law. Wilson was a high court judge in the family division and joined the supreme court in 2011.
After studying history at Oxford university, he became an academic and has continued to publish books on the Hundred Years War. He joined the bar in 1975 and apart from part time judicial roles, he continued to practise as a barrister until joining the court in 2012. He has served on the judicial appointments commissioner.
One of the two Scottish justices on the court, he studied law at Edinburgh University. Reed has sat as an ad hoc judge of the European court of human rights.
He studied law at Cambridge University, and served as attorney general to the Prince of Wales from 1988 to 1994. Carnwath has been chair of the Law Commission.
He became a crown court recorder in 1985 before progressing up through the judicial ranks. He joined the supreme court in 2013.
He is the other Scottish judge on the court. Hodge has served on the Scottish Law Commission and was one of the Scottish intellectual property judges. He joined the court in October 2013.
Last Wednesday 11 green leather seats were placed behind a semi-circular bench in court number one of the supreme court. Never before had 11 chairs been needed. The court has never before sat “en banc” – as a full bench of judges.
The seats were tagged with yellow Post-it stickers, the judges’ surnames scrawled on them so nobody could mistake where they were to sit. A teenage boy from a Belfast grammar, here on a school trip, stared at the stickers. Neuberger (David), president of the court, in the middle; his deputy, Hale (Brenda), to his right; Sumption (Jonathan), another well-known name, three down on the left. “Why is it the judges can overturn Brexit?” the teenager blurted out. His teacher wrung her hands. Had the boy paid more attention he’d know that judges had done no such thing. They are not concerned with politics but with upholding the rule of law.
The point of law at issue – to be examined again when the government’s appeal starts on Monday – is not whether Brexit can be triggered under article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, but how. What is the legal route?
The government claims it can act alone, without consulting parliament, citing prerogative powers wielded by the crown until the civil war, which they claim can still be used when international treaties are concerned.
Those challenging the government accept that article 50 is part of an international treaty, but argue that it is embedded in British law by the European Communities Act of 1972. Because of this, and because withdrawal directly affects the rights of British citizens, only parliament can trigger it. It was to preserve those rights that in 1648 parliament ordered the king’s head to be chopped off.
When the high court ruled against the government last month, Brexiteers, led by Nigel Farage’s Ukip, erupted in furore, and the Daily Mail declared the judges “enemies of the people” standing in the way of Brexit. And yet not only were the judges not obstructing Brexit, they were giving more power to parliament – which is what the out camp had called for throughout its campaign.
This week’s hearing is perhaps the most important constitutional case in 140 years. It has a significance far wider than Brexit. Not since 1876, when law lords first sat, have judges been asked to rule so broadly on who in Britain wields power. Unless the justices hold the line, asserting the sovereignty of parliament, tyranny of the majority threatens, according to human rights lawyers. “That tyranny today is embodied in the hyenas of the Daily Mail and the populist politicians both here and in the US, “ said Lord Lester, staunch campaigner for the removal of all crown powers. “I say make parliament the king.”
But it is precisely because the case is so important that the onslaught on the judges by the Mail, as well as the Murdoch press and Ukip, has been so extreme. Their attacks – made uglier because the judges cannot answer back – stem from the fear that if the supreme court upholds the earlier ruling, it might undermine the hard Brexit they wish for.
In a sense, these attacks have been no surprise – they are a continuation of the intemperate leave campaign’s stirring up of distrust of the liberal elite and its institutions. And the judges, though not all liberal, are certainly all part of the elite: with only one woman on the bench and no ethnic minorities, they have a long way to go to be truly representative.
Even so there is a wider context, because courts and judges are under attack around the world, as the populist surge spreads and accepted norms are discarded. Donald Trump plans to fill three potential vacancies in the supreme court with rightwing ideologues. And the international criminal court is being undermined by the desertion of a number of African countries, led by South Africa.
High on the Brexiteers’ complaints is that the judiciary is unaccountable. The Mail proposes that judges be elected, but this entirely misses the point of the British system, in which the judiciary, the third arm of government, must remain independent to enforce the rule of law without fear or favour.
This is not to say, however, that the judges can’t be accountable. In their own way they are. These are men and women who, as one lawyer put it, “deal in words” – analysing and weighing the words of earlier judges, and adapting their meaning for today. One could say therefore that they are answerable to judges past, to whose gowns were once cut from the same cloth and to whose words they owe a duty of care when considering or reproducing them – such as Sir Edward Coke, who in a 1610 case insisted: “The king hath no prerogative but that which the law of the land allows him.” Quoted in the high court judgment, Sir Edward will no doubt be heard again this week, as his guidance is sought by the supreme court.
The justices are embracing transparency as a way of being accountable too. It is now nearly 10 years since they left their home in the dingy committee rooms of the House of Lords to move into a rebranded supreme court building. This week’s hearing will be live-streamed on four channels, with an internal video link for those who cannot find a seat in the court itself. This openness may have increased the scrutiny of and hostility towards the judges themselves. Even so, transparency has been a good thing.
Though the attacks have been extraordinary and unprecedented, there are signs that the judges will not be cowed. Sitting “en banc” they have strength in numbers. They cannot be accused of fixing the result by selecting the most pro-European among them to hear the case. A carpenter has even extended the bench to make sure the 11th judge can squeeze in behind.
Once they have heard both sides, they will deliberate in private. Neuberger will give each judge a say, starting with the most recently appointed - those sitting on the outside edge of the bench - and working his way in. When the degree of consensus is clear, one will write the draft of the judgment, while others with dissenting views will write theirs. If possible, Neuberger will then seek to close the differences, achieving unanimity.
Hale and Neuberger are liberals and will be wary of overturning the earlier ruling, especially given the seniority of the judges in that case. Some say the two Scottish judges could be dissenters, as might Sumption, a known conservative. If he dissents, his arguments could be of sufficient intellectual calibre to win others round.
On the other hand, Sumption is also a medieval historian who knows how painstakingly the country has constructed its rule of law. It is said that Sumption has been outraged by the attacks on judges, and has been heard to warn that the very political order is in danger of collapse. In that case, he may prove the most independent of all.
As the 11 justices take their seats they will certainly be prepared for more attacks from the Mail and others. On Friday came the paper’s worst salvo yet, a carefully crafted set of slurs about the judges and their families, with sinister hints that far worse was yet to come. Saturday brought more external pressure as the critical arguments to be made to the supreme court by Jeremy Wright, the attorney general, were aired via an already hostile press.
This is unfair, and dangerous, for it is a testament to the judges’ independence that nobody really knows how they will rule. They have seats and stage directions, but the words will be entirely their own. The attorney general complained that the high court rendered Brexit itself a footnote. That is indeed how the supreme court should view the week ahead, for the stakes are now so much higher than Brexit.
As they rule, one hopes their words will demonstrate the true position. The independent judiciary is far from being the people’s enemy. It is – in fact – the people’s protector: our truest friend.
• This article was amended on 5 December 2016 to correct the date of Sir Edward Coke’s 1610 high court judgment on the king’s prerogative
Theresa May has said the UK must not “turn our back” on the human rights abuses of foreign countries as she prepares to court Gulf states over a post-Brexit trade deal on a trip to Bahrain.
The prime minister has been urged by campaigners not to set aside human rights concerns in pursuit of a potentially lucrative free-trade arrangement with Middle-Eastern countries.
But May, who will become the first British leader and the first woman to attend the annual gathering of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) annual summit, said on Sunday that the UK must seek to “transform the way we do business” with the region.
“As the UK leaves the EU, we should seize the opportunity to forge a new trade arrangement between the UK and the Gulf,” she said. “This could transform the way we do business and lock in a new level of prosperity for our people.”
She added: “There will be some people in the UK who say we shouldn’t seek stronger trade and security ties with these countries because of their record on human rights. But we don’t uphold our values and human rights by turning our back on this issue. We achieve far more by stepping up, engaging with these countries and working with them.”
Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, and many Conservative MPs believe a trade deal with the Gulf could be one of the first the UK can seal post-Brexit. But the GCC member states – Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar – may demand visa-free travel in return.
The largest political party in Bahrain has been banned from the summit in Manama and both Bahrain and Saudi Arabia have been heavily criticised for their bombing campaign in the Yemen civil war.
In a letter sent to May and published on Sunday, groups including Human Rights Watch, Reprieve and the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, said: “The Bahraini authorities’ orchestrated attack on the rights to free expression, assembly and association has seriously undermined the prospects of a political solution to Bahrain’s domestic unrest.
“If your government is serious about its commitment to encouraging reform and dialogue, you should use this influence to press the government of Bahrain to put an immediate stop to this repression.”
Critics such as Amnesty International claim that UK engagement in Bahrain, such as helping to train its judiciary and giving advice about a police complaints ombudsman, has not led to real change, but instead has become a PR fig leaf.
Despite having a free trade agreement with the European free trade area, the Gulf states have failed to strike a trade deal with the EU and talks with Brussels have in effect been on ice since 2008.
In 2015, British exports to the GCC were £22bn, higher than UK exports to China and more than double those to India.
May’s visit will coincide with an initiative by MPs to give UK authorities the power to seize assets of dictators and human rights abusers who buy luxury property in Britain to conceal their wealth.
A group of backbenchers are seeking to amend the criminal finances bill and to introduce a clause targeting those guilty of abusing human rights outside Britain. It would allow officials and groups such as Amnesty International to apply for an order freezing perpetrators’ UK assets.
The two-day GCC summit is likely to discuss whether it should form a tighter economic Gulf union, including a single market, single currency and customs union modelled on the EU.
Both Saudi Arabia and Bahrain have been pressing the idea of a Gulf Union since 2012, arguing that world insecurity, including the threat posed by Iran, makes the case for forming a large, more unified bloc. Huge democratic and social obstacles lie in front of the project, including concerns about loss of national sovereignty.
UK security and economic ties with Bahrain have been especially close and King Hamad of Bahrain extended the invitation to May, when he visited Downing Street in October. Prince Charles also visited Bahrain last month, along with Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, where he opened a wing of the new Royal Navy base, the construction of which has been funded by the King of Bahrain. During her visit the Duchess of Cornwall raised the issue of women’s rights and domestic violence, setting a bar for the prime minister.
But in a letter sent to May and published on Sunday the rights groups, including Human Rights Watch, Reprieve and the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD), claim: “The Bahraini authorities’ orchestrated attack on the rights to free expression, assembly and association, has seriously undermined the prospects of a political solution to Bahrain’s domestic unrest.
“If your government is serious about its commitment to encouraging reform and dialogue, you should use this influence to press the government of Bahrain to put an immediate stop to this repression.”
In particular, the groups urge the prime minister to call for the release of arrested human rights defender Nabeel Rajab who has been held in solitary confinement in police custody since June 2016. Rajab is facing up to 15 years in prison on charges of insulting a neighbouring state, spreading rumours in wartime and insulting a statutory body. These charges relate to his criticism of the humanitarian cost of the war in Yemen, in which Bahrain is a participant, and for his documentation of torture in Bahrain’s Central Jau Prison. He faces another charge of defaming the state after he wrote a letter to the New York Times in September 2016.
Sheikh Ali Salman, the Shia leader of the largest opposition party, has been jailed for nine years.
The human rights abuses in Bahrain are a specific British concern, as the UK government has provided technical assistance since 2012 to help implement police and judicial reform.
The UK helped to set up two bodies – the Ombudsman of the Ministry of Interior and the Special Investigations Unit within the Public Prosecution Office, both of which receive training and capacity building support from the UK. Both were established in 2012 in the wake of the Bahraini government’s brutal crackdown on protests the previous year.
The foreign secretary Boris Johnson speaking on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show again insisted he was concerned about the Saudi-led bombing campaign in Yemen, saying he had spoken to the Saudi foreign minister about the issue only this weekend.
But Johnson said he believed the Saudi campaign did not represent a serious risk of war crimes violations and added that the UK was not involved in helping Saudi Arabia to set specific bomb targets.
Letters: When we boast of ‘justice of the people, by the people and for the people’ it is the magistrates who enable that
Your account of the continuing implosion of the magistrates courts system (Cuts and low morale trigger exodus of magistrates, 30 November) should be heeded urgently by the government and society generally.
It is not just the court closures (more than 10% already this year) and the disillusion which underlies an accelerating resignation of magistrates, but the profound impact on our civic culture. Unpaid justices of the peace, let us not forget, constitute the backbone of the criminal justice system, handling 90% of court cases (but costing only 1% of the courts and tribunals system’s budget). When we boast of “justice of the people, by the people and for the people”, it is the magistrates who enable that.
Further, loss of local courts means less willingness of citizens to come forward as witnesses (we are shortly to have but a single magistrates court in Suffolk). And local newspaper reporting of cases, which used to be a considerable deterrent to crime, has largely dried up. The loss of invaluable local knowledge by what were local presiding magistrates, and the declining “ownership” by local people of their courts and the justice system, are yet more blows to active citizenship and pride in community.
I sense that few in London understand much of all this. Thus a system widely admired and emulated is expiring, largely unnoticed.
Andrew Phillips
Liberal Democrat, House of Lords
• Having resigned as a magistrate six months ago, I would like to add some other factors discussed in your report.
Cuts to legal aid mean the majority of defendants now appear unrepresented. This leads to defendants either having to defend themselves, a task for which few are well equipped, or to plead guilty when they had a good case to make. Most people would prefer to plead guilty to avoid the £500 trial costs, and in many cases justice is not done. A lawyer would have taken a few moments to advise either a guilty or not guilty plea. On occasions I had to play the role of defence solicitor, asking questions of witnesses that a lawyer should have been asking.
The CPS is also under financial pressure to reduce hearings. This leads to lower-level charges being brought, for example in assault, to get a guilty plea and avoid a trial. The police are increasingly deploying fixed-penalty notices. Offences that once would have been brought to court, such as lesser public order incidents, are now dealt with like a speeding ticket. This asks a defendant to accept responsibility at a time when they may not be thinking clearly enough to make decisions. It may be cheap, but is it justice?
Cuts and privatisation of the probation service had led to a diminution of both their reporting to the court and in their ability to supervise and rehabilitate offenders. Reports that 12 years ago were full and written are now brief verbal reports based on a short interview. Finally, the state of our prisons is such that I felt increasingly unwilling to send people to prison, knowing that short-term prison sentences are ineffective in cutting crime.
Most people who come before magistrates are poor. Yet the basic disposal in these courts is the fine. Fining poor people is not only immoral and cruel but ineffective.
Nigel Reynolds
Mirfield, West Yorkshire
• As one of the many who resigned from the magistracy last year, after 15 years’ service, I was not surprised to read that more and more justices of the peace (JPs) are resigning. While one can understand the need for the judicial system to have appropriate rules and consistency for the administration of justice across the country, the restructuring, centralising and bureaucratisation of the magistracy seems to have done more harm than good.
The magistracy has a long and distinguished history of more than 650 years. One of its fundamental principles is that justice should be accessible and deliverable locally, by magistrates drawn from, and representative of, the local community that they serve. The rot started with the abolition of the local magistrates courts committees, followed by the closure of local courthouses and the establishment of so-called “centres of excellence”, where a specific courthouse in an area deals exclusively with one type of offending, such as domestic violence.
These “reforms”, coupled with reduced court resources, increased restrictions on JPs’ flexibility to use a commonsense approach in applying sentencing guidelines in the light of local communities’ circumstances and the nature of offending, and the introduction of the mandatory victim surcharge (which is just another form of taxation), are simply nails in the coffin.
It will surely not be long before local justice is dead and buried and everything is done online and by video link to “improve the experience of court users”. Since all criminal cases commence in magistrates courts, presumably the successive layers of the criminal court system above them will eventually suffer the same sort of technologically-based fate.
Successive ministers heading the Ministry of Justice have repeatedly told the magistracy about how much it is valued and what a critical role it has in the judicial system. Unfortunately, there is precious little evidence in support of such reassurance.
Paul Faupel
Somersham, Cambridgeshire
• Apart from the “exodus” of magistrates, I can identify another reason why the courts system is suffering a shortage of JPs. At the beginning of this year, my wife stood down from the magistracy after serving for 32 years. At the time of her resignation, she was the longest-serving magistrate in Leicestershire. She stood down because she had to, not because she wanted to. She had reached the age of 70, at which point all JPs are required to retire. Would not one answer to the shortage of magistrates be to abolish this arbitrary and inflexible retirement age and allow them to continue beyond 70? It seems bizarre, when fewer new recruits are coming forward, to allow this drain of talent and experience.
Colin Marsh
Leicester
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
It is correct that “the government has already announced a plan to recruit 2,500 extra prison officers” (Deal raises hopes of end to prisons crisis, 2 December), but that will still leave the service 4,500 short of the staffing level it had four years ago. I’m awaiting a reply to a written question I have tabled seeking clarification of how many more staff will have to be appointed to replace the considerable number expected to leave the service in the next five years, believed to be in the region of 5,500.
Jeremy Beecham
Shadow justice minister, House of Lords
• While agreeing with the rightness of not putting injured armed services personnel and their families through months/years of litigation (Combat related compensation could be raised, 2 December), could I additionally suggest there be some mechanism to estimate these costs before a decision to go to war is made. People are not machines.
Hazel Anderson
Abergavenny, Monmouthshire
• Andrew Davies (‘I can’t control myself’, G2, 30 November) is quoted as saying of the catchphrase “You might very well think that; I couldn’t possibly comment”, “I was pleased to discover that line wasn’t Dobbs, it was me”. That’s odd, because I’m reading House of Cards at the moment (Harper, 2015), and on page 99 Urquhart says: “You might say that, Mattie. I couldn’t possibly comment.”
Raia Browning
Oxford
• My husband died a year ago. I still recycle the Sport section without reading it (Letters, 29 November) with a twinge of sadness.
Lesley Barnes
Greenford, Middlesex
• Re your article (Daily Mail sale ‘can’t be ruled out’, 2 December), I don’t suppose if we all clubbed together…
Sheila Hutchins
Tregony, Cornwall
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
The supreme court judges who will decide whether the government has the right to trigger article 50 without a parliamentary vote have been disgracefully vilified, according to the lead claimant in the case.
Gina Miller, whose dramatic victory in the high court led to accusations that she and the judiciary were trying to thwart the will of the people, also claimed newspaper coverage had incited violence against her.
Speaking to the Guardian before the first day of the government’s appeal against the decision, she said she could no longer travel on public transport, work in her office, or even spend a normal weekend with her family.
But she was most exercised about fresh attacks on the judges before the trial has begun.
“I think it is such a dangerous road to be going down to be attacking the judges and their integrity and their independence,” she added, arguing that they had a right and duty to operate independently of politicians and the media. “They are being vilified and it is totally disgraceful.”
Miller’s comments come as the attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, prepares to assert the government’s authority to trigger Brexit and its supremacy over parliament in international affairs.
One of the most significant constitutional cases ever to be heard at the supreme court, starting on Monday, could also strain the UK’s devolution settlement as the Scottish and Welsh governments weigh in behind Miller.
With the most senior law officers in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland all taking part in proceedings, the government’s ability to push through far-reaching political changes that affect the rights of UK citizens in the devolved administrations without consulting parliament will also be challenged.
Miller criticised the coverage leading up to the case, which has included an article from the Daily Mail naming each of the judges and outlining their views, marital status, incomes and the cost of their family homes.
The article was headed: “11 unaccountable individuals will consider a case that could thwart the will of the majority on Brexit. The Mail makes no apology for revealing their views – and many have links to Europe.”
The coverage follows the newspaper’s controversial front page after the high court ruling in which it branded the three judges who made the decision “enemies of the people”.
Miller said she had received a letter from a man who said his elderly German mother, who had fled the Nazis, had told him the article had sent “shivers down her back” because it was so reminiscent of an Adolf Hitler claim in the 1930s.
Miller said she had been taken aback by the personal threats she had received as a result of taking the case.
“I don’t go anywhere – it has been a complete poisoned chalice,” she said, adding that she had made formal complaints about articles and comments attached to them.
“It is a crime to incite violence against someone,” she said, adding that politicians were also slow to criticise the attacks.
She said that newspaper guidelines did not allow journalists to write about people being “foreign-born” as they did about her, adding that she was a UK citizen from birth.
“You don’t see ‘foreign-born Boris Johnson’,” she added, calling it “disgraceful”.
But Miller said she had no regrets because of the scale of support she had received including hundreds of messages from people who had experienced hate crime on the street.
“I’ve had stories of people speaking another language at a bus stop and being spat on and kicked – it’s horrifying.”
Miller argued that the case was not about stopping Brexit, but simply ensuring that a precedent was not set under which the government could bypass parliament on any issue it chose.
She also said she was baffled that the government had taken the case to the supreme court, because that had allowed the Scottish and Welsh governments to raise the devolution settlement. They had added unnecessary “twists and turns”, she said.
Miller said the key was that Britain did not have a written constitution so triggering article 50 without a parliamentary vote would set a dangerous precedent. “We would be undoing 400 years of democracy and sovereignty if the government were allowed to use this royal prerogative,” she said.
It came as a lawyer representing the second claimant, Deir Dos Santos – who voted for Brexit, called for calm ahead of the hearing, warning that security guards had been called in because of the threat.
David Greene, a solicitor with Edwin Coe LLP, who represents Dos Santos, said: “It is a sad day when space needs to be made at the highest civil court for security guards for parties and party anonymity is required to protect litigants seeking their legitimate right to bring this matter to court.
“The Santos and Miller claim is and has always been about the process for exit from the EU. No more no less. Many see it as an attempt to forestall the exit but Mr Santos voted for Brexit and supports that goal. 
“He and we call for calm ahead of the hearing and the decision ... Neither the parties, including my client, nor judges, are the enemies of the people. The court process and an independent judiciary are the hallmark of a democracy. It would be a sad day indeed when an executive can ride roughshod over the judiciary, portrayed as anti-democratic. To the contrary, we should be celebrating the court process and the rule of law.” 
A senior government legal source said their approach would be to stress the wider constitutional importance of the case, which could have an impact on the use of the royal prerogative in future matters of foreign affairs and defence. 
It is understood ministers felt the first hearings had been framed too much by the claimants going first, but the order will be reversed in the appeal, giving the government the opportunity to shape its case in a different way while making essentially the same argument.
The legal source said the government would have been unlikely to defend the case so vigorously if it was just about one parliamentary vote on triggering article 50, which ministers are confident they would win.
However, there is a strong feeling about the point of principle that the royal prerogative should be preserved for such decisions to prevent future parliamentary votes about every single change involving international treaties.
Ministers are already considering the possibilities for legislation to preserve the royal prerogative if the ruling goes against the government, meaning the executive would much more frequently have to consult parliament on international affairs.
Both the Welsh and Scottish governments will argue that the earlier high court judgment, which said that only parliament had the power to trigger article 50, should be upheld. 
The counsel general for Wales, Mick Antoniw, said: “While Brexit will happen, the UK government cannot trigger it by overriding the British constitution. We heard a lot about ‘taking back control’ during the referendum campaign. Ignoring the governance arrangements of the UK is not a good start to that process.
“Leaving the EU will lead to significant changes to the devolution settlement in Wales. Only the UK parliament can make those changes, which should be with the agreement of the national assembly for Wales. The UK government does not have the power to short-circuit this important mechanism for dialogue between the democratically elected national assembly for Wales and the UK parliament by using the prerogative in this way.”
Most legal opinion is convinced that since the government has not changed its main line of reasoning, it will lose in the supreme court, where 11 justices will consider the case. Prof Michael Zander QC said last week that ministers could be defeated 11-0.
However, Trevor Tayleur, associate professor at the University of Law, argued that the government would be much better placed to make its arguments this time around.
He said the key argument would be that the 1972 European Communities Act had not created new laws but simply acted as a channel to bring European rights into the UK.
He said the government losing would only delay article 50, rather than stop it, but argued that it would show “that the courts are willing to become more assertive in their relationship with the executive”.
These are not easy days to be a feminist in America. The film industry, as well as other progressives in American society, are still reeling over the election of a man who admits to having sexually assaulted women, knowingly using his celebrity to exploit them. Over the last several days a video surfaced (thank you, Elle) from a 2013 interview with the Academy-Award-winning Italian director Bernardo Bertolucci, in which he talks about how he and Marlon Brando conspired to film a rape scene involving butter with the actress Maria Schneider on the set of the Last Tango in Paris, a film that was nominated for two Academy Awards and many other accolades.
It’s important to note that Schneider, who died in 2011, told the Daily Mail in an interview way back in 2007 that she “felt humiliated and, to be honest, I felt a little raped, both by Marlon and by Bertolucci”. Although the rape scene was simulated, stories differ as to what Schneider was told in advance of the shoot. What is not in doubt is that a 19-year-old was blindsided by a bunch of older men who, according to Bertolucci, “wanted her reaction as a girl, not as an actress”.
This woman said she was “a little bit raped” almost a decade ago yet there was no response, no outcry, like there was this weekend. The common theme is that we continue to disbelieve women who are assaulted. It took over 50 women to come forward for the world to believe that Bill Cosby might have been sexually assaulting women for decades. People (even our best and most feminist actresses) still have no problem working with Roman Polanski or Woody Allen, and others whom the world knows have multiple issues with women. And, by the way, Bertolucci was one of the signers of a 2009 petition demanding that Polanski be released from Switzerland while the US was trying to extradite him.
It took Bertolucci admitting to facilitating the rape scene and saying that he “felt guilt but not regret” over what he did for people to believe Schneider, who unfortunately is no longer here to realise the benefits of his confession. Neither is Brando, who according to the reports was also traumatised by what happened. If you read what happened to Schneider after making the film, the suicide attempts and drug problems which were attributed at the time to the onslaught of fame, in hindsight we can see that this woman had PTSD (something that is common with people who have suffered from rape and other traumas) because she had to cover up her own violation and it tortured her for the rest of her life.
The fact that Bertolucci has no “regret” over the scene – because I guess he thought in a warped and unacceptable way that she wouldn’t be able to act like she was being violated if she knew it was coming – belies a complete lack of responsibility. Say “I was wrong and I shouldn’t have done it”. Own it. You made a career as a result of this film, off the back of a woman whom you conspired to mislead for your own interests. She was a 19-year-old actress and you could – and should – have trusted her to do her job on that scene, just like you trusted her to do in other scenes. Maybe you didn’t tell her because she would have said no, and you didn’t want to deal with that?
It would be a different story if this sad tale of Maria Schneider were an isolated incident in the film community – but it’s not. The so-called progressive community of Hollywood hides behind its liberal values while paying men more, not hiring women in equal numbers, sexualising women, kicking women out when they are no longer “fuckable” and, yes, raping them. Rose McGowan and Tippi Hedren are two women actors who have been vocal about their own sexual assaults.
Rape is used as a device in TV and films with such regularity that we are almost immune to it. It is used over and over again in one of the most contentious movies of this awards season, Elle. For those who haven’t seen it, Isabelle Huppert’s character is raped multiple times in the film. There have been a variety of differing opinions related to the “grey area” of whether her character is complicit with her rape. Huppert is no Schneider in this piece. She knew exactly what she was getting into and is winning accolades for the film; she won a Gotham Award last week.
For me there is no grey area. Rape is rape. The stats suggest that between 90-98% of rape survivors tell the truth, yet rape is a felony where the victim is often disbelieved and in turn the conviction rate is absurdly low. When any movie tries to create nuance over an issue that is an epidemic in our culture, we all need to stand up. Movies are not just movies. They are touchstones, reflections of our culture of where we are, of who we all want to be.
• This article was amended on 7December 2016 to remove the impression that the rape scene in Last Tango in Paris was not simulated.
Something very strange is going on. The chairman of the Equality and Human Rights Commission feels he must tell employers it is OK to celebrate Christmas, and that this will not offend unbelievers. The prime minister announces in parliament that of course people should be able to speak freely about their religious convictions. A thinktank argues that there should be a duty of “reasonable accommodation” to religious belief. All these are symptoms of a deep unease and confusion about the role of Christianity in British life.
Britain is a country with an established church in England and another national church in Scotland, a secular ruling class, and a population largely indifferent to distinctively Christian beliefs and overwhelmingly reluctant to go to church, which displays a growing hostility to the notion of “religion” at all. There are also significant religious minorities, primarily Muslim, who have their own arguments with secularism as well as with Christianity.
Some churches see their control of schools as a way back towards relevance, and the government is tempted by the idea that Christian-based schooling produces better results than the purely secular, even though the best research suggests that faith works in practice simply as a proxy for selection on the basis of class and parental wealth.
Much of the noise is based around the tendentious claim that conservative Christians who are prevented from discriminating against gay people are thereby discriminated against. The argument is hardly convincing. Although there were important issues of free speech involved in the case of Ashers bakery in Belfast, and in some other recent cases that did not come to court, Christians are not being persecuted if they are prevented from exercising their beliefs in ways that harm others. Neither are the followers of any other religion.
These prohibitions are not purely the imposition of secular law on religious believers. They are also the imposition of one kind of religious belief on another. There are people motivated by equally sincere and (theologically speaking) equally well-argued religious convictions on both sides of all these debates.
What is more, the conservative Christian case is fundamentally compromised when it is pitched in terms of “religious” freedom rather than what is actually meant, which is that the law of the land should follow specifically Christian principles. Religion is notoriously hard to define, as is secularism. Deciding which kinds of belief deserve special protection even if none are to be treated as theologically true turns out to be very complicated. Unfortunately it is also necessary. It is impossible to construct a nation or any community without shared moral values and practices, and surprisingly difficult to decide, as it were, from first principles, how to move these values beyond platitudes and into action. There is in some secularist discussions an unwarranted assumption that all real disagreement is political, whereas religious opinions are distinguished by being either platitudinous or false. In fact they can be inextricably tangled, and the religious aspect can make political disputes much harder to resolve.
And here the Christian critique has something to offer the rest of the country. There is a long tradition of religious thought about the development of virtues and values. The Christian version derives ultimately from Socrates and Aristotle, but those philosophers thought virtue was entirely compatible with slavery and infanticide, so it has been quite heavily modified since then. The central insight is that both individuals and societies, or social groups, develop their values by living them. Moral questions cannot be answered entirely by reasoning: we discover what kind of creatures we are by living; we develop virtues, like vices, by practising them. A compassionate society is one that treats its members compassionately, not one that makes speeches about the need to do so.
More subtly, the values of a society are developed and maintained by its institutions. These need not be branches of the state. In fact it’s essential that many of them aren’t. Trade unions, food banks, football leagues, even reading groups all qualify, but many will always be religious. It would be stupid and self-destructive to make such groups feel useless and unwanted. The nervousness over Christmas, or even over expressing religious belief, is an absurd expression of a real void at the heart of soulless technocracy.
My brother Sir Mota Singh, who has died aged 86, was the first ethnic minority judge in England when he was appointed in 1982. He forsook the traditional judge’s wig for a turban when sitting at Southwark crown court, London, where he served for more than 20 years.
He was born in Nairobi, Kenya, the eldest of seven children – he had five brothers and a sister – of Dalip Singh Matharu, a garage proprietor, and his wife, Harnam. Aged 16 Mota was forced to assume responsibility for the family when his father was fatally wounded while defending a woman from an attack.
Academically gifted, he was encouraged by his teachers to complete his education, despite being the family breadwinner. He took a clerical position with a firm of advocates in Nairobi and then enrolled with Lincoln’s Inn, London, as a foreign student.
In 1953, accompanied by his wife, Swaran, and young daughter, he set sail from Mombasa for London to complete his bar exams. He continued to work during the day, as a clerk at the Indian high commission.
He returned to Kenya in 1955 and began to practise at the bar. He soon established himself as one of the country’s leading advocates and was often instructed in proceedings involving the Kenyan government. In 1962 he was the first non-European advocate to be appointed secretary of the Law Society of Kenya.
Despite the prospect of a bright legal career in Nairobi, he emigrated to the UK in 1965, determined to practise at the English bar. Soon the scale of his challenge became clear. After six months of failed attempts to obtain a tenancy in chambers, he was compelled to seek alternative employment and accepted an offer to be in-house legal adviser to a national property company. He thrived, and eventually secured a tenancy at 1 Mitre Court, Middle Temple, to begin practising at the bar.
Mota became a specialist in landlord and tenant disputes, and the counsel of choice for leading property companies, but his first brief, from his brother Manmohan Singh, a solicitor, was to represent a client on a drink-driving charge, which he successfully defended alongside his brother. The image of two Sikh lawyers in tailored suits and crisply starched white turbans captured the media’s imagination at the time.
In 1968 Mota was appointed as a member of the Race Relations Board. He took silk in 1976 and three years later was appointed recorder; then a crown court judge in 1982. At Southwark crown court he was one of four judges nominated by the lord chancellor to try serious fraud cases.
A devout Sikh, he would rise at two each morning to begin his daily prayer routine and yoga exercises. He also served as a trustee of charitable organisations including Barnado’s, the Windsor Leadership Trust and the Democracy Forum. In 2012 he was knighted for services to the legal profession and to charity.
He is survived by Swaran and their three children, Pam, Satinder and Jaswinder.
My female friends and colleagues, online and off, have been bleakly unimpressed this weekend by a recent display of bland and worldly impenitence from Bernardo Bertolucci about how he created the “butter” scene in the 1972 film Last Tango in Paris, starring Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider. But they are still more unimpressed about the resulting liberal horror, as if this was a bizarre and scandalous one-off, and not simply yet another detail in the colossal architecture of male power in the movies and everywhere else.
Hollywood’s Captain America star Chris Evans tweeted: “This is beyond disgusting. I feel rage.” Jessica Chastain tweeted: “To all the people that love this film - you’re watching a 19-year-old get raped by a 48-year-old man. The director planned her attack. I feel sick.”
I felt this nausea because like everyone else, in my naivety, I had assumed that Bertolucci had discussed and rehearsed this scene with Brando and Schneider on equal terms, in advance of shooting. This was the shocking moment when Brando’s character Paul brutally penetrates Schneider’s character Jeanne using a stick of butter.
But in recently-surfaced video of an onstage event in 2013, Bertolucci announced that he did not tell Maria Schneider what was going to happen before the take; he and Brando had secretly planned it without her knowledge because the director wanted her humiliation to be real. Two powerful men, aged 32 and 48, had arranged for her to be assaulted. For Maria Schneider herself, it was something more akin to actual physical assault: “I felt humiliated and to be honest, I felt a little raped.” Bertolucci’s Wikipedia page is now getting hammered to this effect.
I myself last wrote about the film in 2007, when Last Tango in Paris was re-released in the UK. I had always believed that the scene was only 50 percent of the film’s meaning - and that the point was that Paul wanted Jeanne to do the same thing back to him: to be painfully penetrated with her fingers, and that his humiliation resided further in being old – that remark about his prostate. In the fictional world of the movie there is a kind of consent, albeit of a loaded kind.
Well, we now know that there was no consent in real life. Whatever balancing moments existed in the story, Bertolucci certainly never discussed anything with Schneider without telling Brando. It was all the other way around. The power lay with the famous director and famous actor. As Chastain says, we are left with disgust.
Hollywood history is full of these iceberg-tips of abuse peeping out. Everyone knows about the big cases: the conviction and exile of Roman Polanski, the (denied and unproven) accusation of Woody Allen. But there is also a vast unacknowledged history of normalised abuse - virtually every female star and many male stars have endured a casting-couch assault, although the MO has of course been offscreen. In his effrontery, Bertolucci put his abuse in front of the camera and like so many men of that era, maintains a tacit claim of permissive liberation and declines to see what was wrong.
Amy Berg’s documentary, An Open Secret, has disclosed the range of child abuse in the film industry. Corey Haim and Todd Bridges have revealed they were assaulted as children, a toxic and hateful pattern of power and manipulation which is part of that same continuum of abuse which reaches to the adult world.
To speak out takes courage. In 1937, a dancer named Patricia Douglas accused studio executive David Ross of rape at a party given by MGM chief Louis B Mayer. Instead of staying silent, she filed a complaint in the LA County district attorney’s office. And a brutal campaign to discredit her was then created by studio fixer Eddie Mannix. Witnesses were bribed to change their stories. The male establishment of the law, politics and the press ganged up and Douglas’s career was crushed although her courage in taking on the system has since made her a heroine.
More recently, Thandie Newton has described her own outrage at this abuse happening as part of the panoply of Hollywood power - just as it did with Schneider. A certain male director was sneeringly boasting to her about having seen a lewd audition videotape another director had made Newton do when she was a struggling young actor.
In 2016, as in 1972, and 1937, there are plenty of disgusting men in the movie industry who don’t see what the problem is. Now they are being forced to confront the poison they have created. 
Dangerous drivers who kill while using a mobile phone at the wheel could face life sentences under plans unveiled by ministers, bringing the punishment in line with those charged with manslaughter.
Motorists who cause death by speeding or street racing, or through careless driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, could also be handed life sentences if proposals to increase the 14-year limit for the offence are adopted.
Under the current penalty, people are usually released after seven years. In 2015, the average sentence for drivers who killed was 45.6 months, or less than four years.
The justice minister Sam Gyimah said the maximum sentence should rise to a life term.
“Killer drivers ruin lives,” he said. “Their actions cause immeasurable pain to families, who must endure tragic, unnecessary losses. While [it is] impossible to compensate for the death of a loved one, we are determined to make sure the punishment fits the crime.
“My message is clear: if you drive dangerously and kill on our roads, you could face a life sentence.”
Last year, 122 people were convicted of causing death by dangerous driving, including those who were speeding, street racing and using a mobile phone. A further 21 people were convicted of causing death by careless driving while under the influence.
A Ministry of Justice consultation will seek views on whether the current maximum penalty available to the courts should be increased.
As well as plans to increase the maximum sentence of causing death by dangerous driving, or careless driving, to a life term, the proposals include creating a new offence of causing serious injury by careless driving, which would carry a maximum sentence of three years.
The MoJ will also consider increasing the minimum driving bans for those convicted of causing death on the roads.
Road safety campaigners welcomed the proposals, but said ministers should go further in punishing what the RAC described as an “epidemic” of motorists texting, checking messages and making calls while driving.
Gary Rae, the campaigns director for road safety charity Brake, said: “This is a vindication of our efforts, and those of victims’ families, calling for change through our roads to justice campaign. For too long, the justice system has treated them as second-class citizens.”
But he said there were concerns that the charge of “careless” driving remained. “Some of the strongest feedback we have received from the families we work with is that there is nothing careless about taking someone else’s life,” he said.
“We also want clarification on whether the current automatic 50% discount, where convicted drivers serve only half their jail term, will still apply for these new, proposed sentences.”
Last week, a lorry driver was sentenced to six years in prison for killing two men when he ploughed into them four seconds after using Facebook.
Keith Mees, 49, had been sending a message to his girlfriend saying he was splitting up with her when he drove into a line of traffic, crushing Marian Olteanu, 35, and Ion Calin, 42, to death. He had also been streaming YouTube videos and chatting on the phone.
The Department for Transport has increased the punishment for those using a mobile at the wheel.
The fine rose from £100 to £200 and penalty points doubled from three to six, so those found to be offending on more than one occasion will reach the 12-point threshold for a ban.
Letters: When we boast of ‘justice of the people, by the people and for the people’ it is the magistrates who enable that
It’s an October afternoon at the Royal Courts of Justice, central London. In a high-ceilinged, stone-floored corridor, barristers in black gowns and white wigs flick through fat files. A trio of dark-suited solicitors talk in low tones. The word “redacted” drifts up out of their conversation.
A few yards away, there’s a room with a very different picture. A man in a worn leather jacket is getting help filling in a form. Another, in his 50s, is on the phone trying to get a copy of a court order. This is the Personal Support Unit (PSU), a charity that helps litigants in person (LIPs), people going to court without lawyers or barristers. PSU volunteers explain procedures and forms, but don’t give legal advice. As an LIP, reading up on the law and presenting your case to a judge is down to you.
The stress of resorting to the law can be so great that, win or lose, most people are glad to walk away when it’s done. But not always. Some LIPs come back for more and carry on fighting their corner when most would have given up long ago. They believe that if only they could find the right judge, the right loophole in the law or the right bit of evidence, they will get justice. And then, almost without noticing it, the law has become their life.
“I’ve been a litigant in person for more than 20 years,” says 71-year- old Maurice Kirk. “My cases have taken over my life. They’ve cost me my family, my health and my qualifications as a veterinary surgeon. Twenty years – I never thought it would last this long.”
Kirk, a qualified pilot who recently flew across Africa in a vintage air rally, says he’s currently fighting “about 15” court cases. Twelve are part of his 24-year dispute with South Wales police. He admits he has become obsessive about taking the police to court. “But I won’t give up because I know I’m right,” he says. The legal battles stem from “a campaign of harassment and bullying” which he says started in 1992, when he moved to Barry in the Vale of Glamorgan to open a veterinary practice.
“I was constantly stopped for motoring offences,” he says. He admits there were also high-speed car chases and a fine for resisting a police officer. Stung by what he saw as continued injustice, following previous run-ins with the police in Guernsey, Kirk started to go to court to get his convictions overturned.
“I was forced to be a litigant in person because the lawyers I employed proved thoroughly disappointing,” he says.
Kirk blamed South Wales police when he was removed from the register of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) in 2002 for unprofessional behaviour. The RCVS cited his 11 convictions among the reasons for striking him off. Kirk applied to go back on the RCVS register several times, always representing himself at hearings. They turned him down.
He changed tactics. “I thought if I could prove the police had treated me badly, I might be able to go back on the register as a vet,” he says. He decided to sue South Wales police for damages, but preparations were interrupted when he was charged with the illegal possession and sale of a Lewis machine gun.
Kirk, who already had convictions for assault, spent eight months on remand until a Cardiff Crown Court trial in 2010. He defended himself. The jury found him not guilty.
The damages case came to court in 2013. “I’d been preparing for this since the 90s,” says Kirk. “There were a lot of witnesses to find and interview. I hired a private investigator to trace some of them.”
Kirk represented himself in 47 days of hearings. He was allowed damages for two of 33 incidents, but the judge ruled there was no conspiracy. Kirk is preparing an appeal. South Wales police said: “It would be inappropriate to comment” as proceedings were continuing.”
“I used to be terrified of going to court,” says Elizabeth Watson, “but I’ve had no option. Like most litigants in person I was forced into it.” Bournemouth company director Watson is fighting the Bank of Scotland for her home. The bank says she owes them more than £345,000. She says she doesn’t owe them a penny. “Something like this – it comes in and it invades your life,” says Watson. “It dominates the landscape. It’s like a rotting corpse.”
What Watson calls her “life hijack” started in 2002 when she put money into an investment scheme run by Leicester accountants Dobb White. She says she was told it had the backing of senior people at the Bank of Scotland. The bank lent her £345,000 to invest in the scheme, but it was a fraud. Investors in the UK and US lost over $200m – around £165m at current rates. The Bank of Scotland came after Watson – and other investors – for their money.
Watson had been an LIP before. “They were silly things, though. A dry cleaner ruined a cream suit I had, so I took her to court for compensation.” Watson won these early cases. But going up against a bank with a full legal team has been very different. “There’s no equality of arms. It feels like a rigged game,” she says. Watson has now been to court “over 20 times”, with the case lasting eight years so far. The court file – in one judge’s estimation – runs to over 1,000 pages. “At the beginning I felt very bewildered.”
Although she has sometimes had legal help, Watson has done most of the work herself. She’s taken it all the way to the court of appeal and the supreme court. The bank won possession of her house in July 2015. Her attempt to appeal against that decision was dismissed in May this year. The judge criticised her for the way she’d run her case and gave her a limited civil restraint order. This stops her from taking any further action in the case without first getting permission from a judge. The Bank of Scotland is currently trying to make her bankrupt. Bankruptcy can effectively stop someone from pursuing civil action.
A Bank of Scotland spokesman said the bank “at no point provided advice or recommendations to customers about the Dobb White scheme”. He added: “Repossession is always a last resort,” and that the bank hoped, “we could still work with Mr and Mrs Watson to agree a resolution to this issue.”
Peter Oakes has sued – or attempted to sue – the police, council officials and other public servants. He says he’s been to court “about 20 times” over the past 18 years.
“I’ve never won a case,” says 72-year-old Oakes, who lives in Crewe. “But I’ve had to keep going. My experience has unglued everything I believed in. Once you fall foul of an official body, it seems all the others conspire against you.”
Oakes says his battles with officialdom started in the United States in 1991 when he owned a company selling aquarium supplies. A dispute over money with a client in Florida led to Oakes being arrested by local police and eventually found guilty on a charge of criminal trespass. He was fined $400.
Oakes insists he was innocent of any wrongdoing, so it’s understandable he felt unfairly treated by the US legal system. But he was also convinced he’d been let down by the British authorities.
“The Foreign Office did nothing,” he says. “They didn’t lift a finger in any shape or form to help me.”
Oakes’s feelings of injustice drove him to read up on the law. He hit on a clause in the Criminal Justice Act 1948, which he believed meant that British officials could be prosecuted for not carrying out their duties abroad.
“I reported [a Foreign Office official in Florida] to Cheshire police for misconduct in a public office,” he says. The police declined to investigate, so Oakes sued them for “failing to carry out their duties”. A judge threw the case out.
In protest, Oakes refused to pay the portion of his council tax that went to police services. His local authority, Crewe and Nantwich (now part of Cheshire East council), took him to court. He represented himself.
“My defence was under the Trade Descriptions Act. I wasn’t getting the services from the police, so I wasn’t paying the money,” he says.
Magistrates ordered him to pay up. He refused. Representing himself at a later hearing, he attempted a citizen’s arrest on a council official. That led to conviction for assault and two months in prison. The local authority eventually bankrupted him in 2010 for unpaid council tax and court costs. Oakes and his wife Jean had to remortgage their house to raise cash to annul the bankruptcy. “She doesn’t usually get involved, but she’s always been very supportive,” says Oakes.
Other fallout from his court cases include more convictions, for assault and harassment, and another two months in jail – as well as the belief that “the establishment is corrupt”. Oakes has had some sympathy from “the establishment” during his battles. A judge once told him that he “was satisfied that he has suffered cruelly over a number of years”.
“When all this started, people said to me, ‘You’re paranoid,’” says Oakes. “I’m not bloody paranoid. But when officials get something wrong, they don’t put their hands up and say they’re sorry, they just come back at you.”
Oakes now helps other LIPs with their cases. He’s also writing a book about his experiences. The Foreign Office said they did not comment on details of consular cases or individual members of staff. Cheshire police said they could not comment as they only hold records of civil cases for six years.
When she was sentenced to seven years for fraud, Julia McClaren found the civil law becoming a large part of her life .
The former theatre producer went to court from prison when a cattery that had been looking after her cats, Arthur and Bella, gave them away without her permission.
“I was furious,” says McClaren. “I don’t have kids; I’ve never wanted kids. Those cats are my family. They mean more to me than anything.”
Arthur and Bella had been living with McClaren’s 83-year-old mother while she had been serving her sentence, but she’d been admitted to hospital after she fell and broke a hip. A social worker then lodged the two animals in a local cattery. But when McClaren sent a friend to pick them up, the cattery wouldn’t let her take them.
“They tried to make out that I’d breached their contract by not paying the bills,” says McClaren. “I wrote to them and pointed out that they’d never sent me any bills. And then they’d stopped my authorised representative from collecting them.”
Then McClaren heard the cattery had given away Arthur and Bella to Susan 
 Watkins, one of their employees.
“They’d helped themselves to my property,” says McClaren. “And they thought they could do that because I was in prison. I just wanted them to be forced to admit that they should never have done it.”
McClaren’s first stop was the library at HMP Downview, a women’s prison in 
 Sutton, Surrey.
She started to read up on contract law. “There were only about three books on the subject. And they were all way out of date. But the principles hadn’t changed. I looked at it all and thought to myself: ‘This is the perfect way of sticking it to them.’
“Cats are considered property under the law,” explains McClaren, who had been to court as a litigant in person before this case. “As property, they are owned by somebody. I believed that the cattery had breached my rights by giving the cats – my property – away to this woman.”
McClaren drafted detailed paperwork setting out why she thought the cattery was in the wrong and then started proceedings.
At court – which McClaren was taken to and from in a prison van – the two sides came to an agreement. The cats could stay with Susan Watkins for the moment, but McClaren would make arrangements for a friend to collect them.
However, Watkins refused to give the cats up, so when McClaren was finally released from prison nine months later, she went back to court. “At the hearing, Watkins went on that I was a bad person and that the cats would suffer if they were moved,” says McClaren. “I just pointed out that they belonged to me, not her.”
The judge agreed. He ordered that Arthur and Bella had to be handed over the following day – in the car park of a local supermarket.
“I have to say there was a rather petty sense of self-satisfaction of sticking one up to them,” says McClaren. “But I’d made my point. Just because someone is in jail, it doesn’t mean that they lose their property or their rights.”
Some names have been changed
Comments by the director of the film Last Tango in Paris, Bernardo Bertolucci, that he conspired with Marlon Brando to film a graphic rape scene without the consent of 19-year-old actor Maria Schneider have prompted outrage in Hollywood.
Speaking in a video from 2013 that surfaced recently, Bertolucci said he and Brando came up with the idea to shoot the infamous scene depicting assault, in which Brando’s character uses a stick of butter to anally rape his lover, played by Schneider.
“The sequence of the butter is an idea that I had with Marlon in the morning before shooting,” Bertulocci said at an event held at La Cinémathèque Française in Paris in 2013. He said he “wanted her reaction as a girl, not as an actress”.
“I think she hated me and also Marlon because we didn’t tell her that there was that detail of the butter used as lubricant,” he said.
Although he admitted that not telling her the plan was “horrible”, Bertolucci said he didn’t regret how he decided to direct the scene.
Last Tango in Paris – which was made in 1972 and tells the story of a man who enters into an anonymous affair after his wife takes her own life – shocked audiences when it was released due to its graphic depictions of sex and rape and is still considered to be controversial. At the time of filming Brando was 48, while Schneider was 19.
Schneider, who went on to have serious drug addiction problems and depression, said in 2007 that she felt humiliated and “a little raped”. During the interview Schneider confirmed the scene was simulated and there was no real sex.
She said she was told about the contents of the scene shortly before the shoot and that it wasn’t in the original script.
“I was so angry, she said. “I should have called my agent or had my lawyer come to the set because you can’t force someone to do something that isn’t in the script, but at the time, I didn’t know that,” she told the Daily Mail.
“Marlon said to me: ‘Maria, don’t worry, it’s just a movie’.”
“After the scene, Marlon didn’t console me or apologise. Thankfully, there was just one take,” she said. Schneider died from cancer in 2011.
Bertolucci’s comments prompted outrage on social media, with celebrities among those calling for the director to be stripped of his awards or to be prosecuted.
Jessica Chastain said the comments made her feel sick.
Evan Rachel Wood retweeted Chastain’s comments, adding, “I second that. This is heartbreaking and outrageous. The 2 of them are very sick individuals to think that was ok.”
Chris Evans wrote: “Wow. I will never look at this film, Bertolucci or Brando the same way again. This is beyond disgusting. I feel rage,” which prompted a response from Anna Kendrick.
“Ms Schneider stated this several years ago. I used to get eye-rolls when I brought it up to people (aka dudes),” Kendrick tweeted. Evans replied that the men should be in jail.
Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
Dangerous drivers who kill are set to face life sentences under plans put forward by ministers. Those causing death by speeding, street racing or while using a mobile phone will face the same sentences as people charged with manslaughter.
Offenders who cause death by careless driving while under the influence of drink or drugs could also be handed life sentences – an increase on the current 14-year upper limit.
“Killer drivers ruin lives,” said justice minister Sam Gyimah. “Their actions cause immeasurable pain to families, who must endure tragic, unnecessary losses. While impossible to compensate for the death of a loved one, we are determined to make sure the punishment fits the crime.”
A Ministry of Justice consultation will seek views on whether the current maximum penalties available to the courts should be increased. The department said that the new measures would see custodial sentences for causing death by careless or dangerous driving increase from an average of 45.8 months in 2015.
Proposals include increasing the maximum sentence for causing death by either dangerous or by careless driving from 14 years to life, and creating a new offence of causing serious injury by careless driving, which would carry a maximum sentence of three years. There are also proposals to increase the minimum driving bans for those convicted of causing death.
The department says the consultation delivers on the government’s pledge to consider the sentencing powers available to the courts for the most serious driving offences. In 2015, 122 people were sentenced for causing death by dangerous driving, with a further 21 convicted of causing death by careless driving while under the influence.
This week, the supreme court of the United Kingdom will hear the government’s article 50 appeal in what promises, with its live TV coverage and internet streaming, to be the court’s most contentious and closely followed case since its establishment seven years ago.
At that time, there were many critics of the new court, which replaced the law lords as the country’s highest court. Chief among them was the then law lord Lord Neuberger, who dismissed the court as the creation of a “last-minute decision over a glass of whisky”. He feared that the British constitution was being dangerously “muck[ed] around” and noted that there was a pronounced risk of “judges arrogating to themselves greater power than they have at the moment”.
David Neuberger, Baron Neuberger of Abbotsbury, appears to have since overcome his doubts about the supreme court, at least to the extent of becoming, four years ago, its president.
The sovereignty of parliament is the issue at the heart of the article 50 case. Both sides lay claim, in different ways, to be defending it. The government insists that, as the parliamentary executive, acting on the will of people as expressed in the referendum on European Union membership, it has the right to invoke article 50 without a parliamentary debate and vote.
The government’s opponents, namely Gina Miller, Deir Tozetti Dos Santos and others, have argued that, as the referendum is not binding under existing law, the government is legally obliged to ratify the result with a vote in parliament.
Only parliament, they maintain, can remove the rights that parliament enshrined in the 1972 European Communities Act.
The high court agreed with Miller and co and, as a result, the three judges involved in that decision found themselves denounced on the front page of the Daily Mail as “enemies of the people” and as “judicial activists” by Ukip.
Suddenly, the British judiciary was in the dock, with public confidence in the constitutional role of our senior judges brought into question. Although the supreme court’s job is simply to interpret and pass judgment on the law, its president will be keen to demonstrate the disinterested position of his court.
And to combat any notion of a restrictive view, for the first time in its short history, all 11 justices of the supreme court will hear an appeal. The maximum is usually nine. The justices are not, as Neuberger has attested, a study in social diversity – they’re all white, nine out of 11 were privately educated and 10 out of 11 are men.
Many legal experts are predicting an unambiguous government loss. Michael Zander, emeritus professor of law at the London School of Economics, wrote recently in the legal magazine Counsel: “The government could be looking at losing 11-0.”
Unlike in the US, where the politics of its supreme court justices are well known and, indeed, usually one of the reasons for their appointment, British justices maintain a far more neutral profile. Some of the 11, for example the deputy president, Lady Hale, and Lord Kerr, have a reputation for being staunch defenders of European human rights legislation. Others, such as Lord Sumption, have cautioned against the expansion of judicial power both in domestic and European courts.
But it’s not possible to draw a clear and definitive line between “liberals” and “conservatives”, let alone “friends” and “enemies” of the “people”. In any case, 11 justices is probably too large a number to fit on a Daily Mail front page. So if the government’s case is rejected, negative attention may focus on Neuberger.
It already has. Charles Moore, a former editor of the Daily Telegraph, has called on Neuberger (along with Hale) to recuse himself on the grounds that he is not impartial. Moore drew attention to pro-European tweets by Neuberger’s wife, Angela Holdsworth, in which she derided the referendum as “mad and bad” and retweeted a Remain campaign message: “It seems unlikely that a PM could trigger Article 50 without Parliament’s approval.”
The supreme court’s conduct guide reminds justices “to bear in mind that political activity by a close member of a justice’s family might raise concern in a particular case about the judge’s own impartiality”. Neuberger’s spokesman responded to suggestions that Holdsworth’s tweets raised exactly that concern by noting that the president doesn’t confuse political views with points of law.
A better contender for the flouting of guidelines, perhaps, was Hale’s intervention. She suggested during a lecture in Malaysia that if the government lost its appeal, it might need “a comprehensive replacement” for the 1972 act, a move that would push back the government’s March deadline for enacting article 50 by several months.
Neuberger appeared to reprimand his deputy when he told a reporter that in general, “judges shouldn’t discuss cases we’re about to hear”. However, he stood by her fitness to sit. “We have taken an oath to decide cases according to the law,” he explained, “and if we don’t do that we’re not worthy of the name of judges.”
Neuberger has held that name for 26 years. He comes from a family of scientists and rabbis. His father was professor of chemical pathology at St Mary’s hospital in Paddington, London, and his uncle was a well-known rabbi.
He has two brothers who are professors of, respectively, medicine and immunology and his other brother, a professor of finance, is married to Julia Neuberger, the crossbench peer and first British female rabbi to have her own synagogue.
Neuberger studied chemistry at Oxford, though he has said that he was “not very good at science”.
His choice, he has said, was to go into finance or law and he decided on finance because law involved too many exams. He joined the merchant bank NM Rothschild, only to realise that he was “even less good at finance than at science”.
And so in 1974, aged 26, after four attempts at pupillage, he was called to the bar. An expert in property law, he took silk in 1987, became a recorder three years later and a high court judge in 1996. His ascendancy through the senior judiciary was vertiginous, becoming a lord justice of appeal in 2004 and then, the day after his 59th birthday in 2007, a law lord.
Law lords tend to rival the Chinese politburo in the gerontocracy stakes, so still in his 50s, Neuberger was by some way the youngest. Two years later, he became master of the rolls, the second most senior judge in England and Wales.
He has known previous moments in the spotlight. He was wrongly said to have supported the right of witnesses and defendants to wear veils when giving evidence, but actually holds the opposite view. In 2004, when a court of appeal judge, Neuberger reached a minority decision – in opposition to his fellow judges – disallowing evidence obtained by torture in third countries where the UK was not complicit in gaining the evidence.
If that stance identified him as a liberal, other decisions might suggest otherwise; in 2010, for example, he ruled that peace protesters should be evicted from Parliament Square. To look back over Neuberger’s rulings, his decisions are not easily filed under distinct political labels. Although judges must be free to decide on the law as it stands, Neuberger believes, and knows, that they must always remain subordinate to the government. After all, if the government doesn’t like a legal ruling it can draw up new legislation and change the law.
That’s the defining difference between the US and British systems: in America, it’s prohibitively difficult to overturn a supreme court decision. The benefit of the lower stakes in Britain is that we can afford to appoint our supreme court justices for their legal expertise rather than their political loyalty.
It’s not Neuberger’s or any other supreme court or high court judge’s fault that the government decided to hold a referendum without clarifying the legal obligations of a Leave vote. Nor is it their fault that Miller decided to test the government’s legal position. That’s the nature of the law.
Given the legal merits of Miller’s case, and the government’s reliance on ancient and obscure prerogative powers, it would have taken a particularly slanted political position for the high court to have sided with the government. And the supreme court finds itself facing the same delicate situation.
Its judgment is not due until the new year. If, as expected, it backs the high court decision, Neuberger can look forward to a bucketload of opprobrium poured over his head on the front pages of several Brexit-supporting newspapers. But he can also look forward to retirement next year.
He’s already announced that he’s hanging up his wig in the summer – or he would be if he wore one. In the supreme court, justices’ wigs are deemed to be like political opinions: surplus to requirements.
Born David Edmond Neuberger, 10 January 1948, in London, to Albert and Lilian Neuberger. He went to Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford. Married to Angela Holdsworth; three children.
Best of times His legal career has been one long upswing, so there are any number of highlights, but becoming the country’s youngest law lord may well stand out above the rest.
Worst of times Going by newspaper coverage, it could be next month (January), if the supreme court upholds the high court’s decision on Brexit.
What he says “A white, male, public-school judge presiding in a trial of an unemployed traveller from eastern Europe accused of assaulting or robbing a white, female, public-school woman will, I hope, always be unbiased. However, he should always think to himself what his subconscious may be thinking or how it may be causing him to act.”
What others say “After reading Lady Neuberger’s thoughts, one naturally wonders about Lord Neuberger’s. And that is exactly what ought not to happen when judges find themselves embroiled in a politically controversial case.” Charles Moore
Courts are ‘creaking’ as budget cuts and closures bite, according to some of those who work in them
His Royal Highness Emere Godwin Bebe Okpabi, the paramount ruler and hereditary king of the Ogale community in the oil-rich Niger delta, is ready to explode.
After nearly a week of sittting quietly in top hat and regal chains in the obscure technology and construction court in London listening to Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil company, argue why 45,000 impoverished Ogalean farmers should not be allowed to sue the company in Britain for historical pollution, he says he feels “betrayed and saddened … I dispute everything they have said. To listen to Shell saying they have not been not responsible for the pollution in Ogale has been dreadful.”
King Emere wants to sue Shell in London for not cleaning up pollution because he fears his community may never get justice in Nigeria. “You can never, never defeat Shell in a Nigerian court. A case can go on for very many years. You can hardly get a judgment against [an oil company] in Nigeria. Shell is Nigeria and Nigeria is Shell.”
The stakes are high, he says. If the London judge hearing the preliminary arguments finds for the king then, in around one year’s time, Shell will have to defend itself in the British courts. The result could be a massive clean-up of Ogale, possibly millions of dollars’ in damages and other polluted communities bringing their cases to Britain.
The judge, who has nearly 1,000 pages of reports, submissions and statements from the two sides to consider will rule in the early new year. But if Shell wins, says the king, then the case will have to be heard in Nigeria where they may be able to avoid justice for decades because cases can get kicked between the appeal and supreme courts for many years.
“We are desperate people looking for justice. We know we cannot get justice there. A community near us got a huge judgment against Shell but the appeals have taken 10 years so far. In one case it has taken a community 32 years so far to get justice.”
Shell’s lawyers respond that the Nigerian justice system has been reformed and speeded up and that its Nigerian subsidiary, SPDC, should be held responsible for any pollution rather than the parent company, Shell International. They claim that Ogale has also been heavily affected by theft, pipeline sabotage and illegal refining rather than failure of infrastructure.
The king and and his legal team from a UK law firm, Leigh Day, argue that a precedent was set last year when Zambian villagers were allowed to take an Indian company to court in London over water pollution by a subsidiary because the Zambian legal system was deeply flawed.
That pollution has occurred in Ogale from old Shell and Nigerian oil company pipelines is not disputed. Official records say there have been more than 40 major spills in the small Ogale kingdom over the years, of which 23 have been since 2011.
In 2011 the UN environment programme (Unep) published a scientific study of pollution in Ogoniland which said it found oil spills happening with “alarming regularity” in Ogale, including groundwater contamination that is more than 4,500 times Nigerian recommended levels. Water samples taken in 2010 from three metres below ground were found to be contaminated with benzene and other chemicals.
King Emere offers a bottle of water taken recently, he says, from an Ogale borehole. The liquid smells powerfully of oil and tastes foul. “This is what we must drink. It is getting worse. We are getting strange illnesses. Our boys and girls cannot have children. We have strange deaths,” he says.
But the king says he is most saddened because he has witnessed the complete breakdown of trust between the company and his community. “I was a child of the 60s and 70s. We had a good relationship with the company. They would come with their Land Rovers. As little boys we would push them just to touch the Shell Land Rover. We used to go under the gas flare at the manifold to see the big beetles. We had no electricity. Our only lighting was the flare. We played there. When I was at primary school we used to run into the bush to get fruits, beautiful fruits. Now we have nothing.
“We did not know about pollution then. There were a lot of spills. We would see them and think nothing of them. We never knew that Shell was planting a time-bomb. We gradually realised things were getting bad in the 1980s and 1990s.
“Have we done well out of the partnership with Shell? No. They have dumped us. I got saddened as I sat in the court and watched them trying to create a distance between themselves and the consequences of pollution. I saw them trying to push the blame on to someone else.
“The truth is that Royal Dutch Shell has been responsible for the damage in my community. The same people we loved are killing us now.”
It’s the stuff of TV drama: schoolgirls befriend a German prisoner of war being held in Scotland during the second world war. After learning that he had never seen moving pictures, they smuggle him out of the camp for the day and take him to the cinema so he can watch a film for the first time.
That kindness is behind the reason Heinrich Steinmeyer decided to leave almost £400,000 in his will to the people of Comrie in Perthshire.
The former Waffen SS soldier was captured in France in 1944 when he was 19 and held at the PoW camp at Cultybraggan near Comrie. Classified as a category C prisoner – or hardline Nazi – Steinmeyer was detained there until June 1945 before being moved to another unit in Caithness and then a camp in Fife before eventually being released in 1948.
He returned to Comrie regularly after being freed and made life-long friendships in the area. The German died in 2014, aged 90, and his ashes were scattered in the hills above the camp.
Two years later, his wish to leave £384,000 to the village has been recognised and has been donated to the village’s local community trust to be spent on local development for the elderly. 
The Courier newspaper said part of Steinmeyer’s will reads: “I would like to express my gratitude to the people of Scotland for the kindness and generosity that I have experienced in Scotland during my imprisonment of war and hereafter.”
One of the friends he made was George Carson, who died just two weeks before the former soldier.
His son, also called George, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It sounds like an unbelievable story but it’s absolutely true. My mother and her friends, all school children at Morrison’s academy in Crieff, made friends with Heinrich through the fence of the Cultybraggan camp.
“During these conversations they discovered that Heinrich had never seen a moving picture, so they went up with their push bikes one morning. One of the girls had taken her brother’s school uniform,” Carson said. “They smuggled him out of the camp through the chain-link fence and into the cinema where he saw his very first film. He was absolutely blown away by the whole experience.”
Carson said he met Steinmeyer a couple of times and described him as a “wonderful man … He had meetings with the Comrie Development Trust in 2008 and asked them to manage his estate on his death. He was quite specific in his will that the money should only be used on the elderly in the village,” Carson said. “This is his thanks for the kindness shown to him at the point of his life where he was at his lowest and he just wants to say thank you to everybody.”
The funds have now been transferred to a Heinrich Steinmeyer Legacy Fund and a consultation has begun to determine how best to spend his legacy.
Business gets off to a brisk start as the three magistrates take their seats on the bench in court three of Luton magistrates court.
Within an hour a 50-year-old local businessman, found slumped at the wheel of his stationary company vehicle in a layby, has been dispatched with £1,036 to pay in fine and costs and a six-month driving ban. An out-of-work drink-driver, arrested at 2am for driving with no lights, leaves with £235 to pay in fine and costs, and a 12-month disqualification. He can cut that to nine months by paying to attend a drink-drive referral scheme, at a cost of up to £250.
This is typical fare for the 17,000 justices of the peace in England and Wales, and both cases are dealt with swiftly by the bench, equipped with iPads and sentencing guidelines and aided by a qualified legal clerk, or legal adviser.
To the casual observer, there is no outward sign of an overburdened, creaking system, ground down by budget cuts and court closures, which, according to the Magistrates Association, is leading to disaffected magistrates resigning in “considerable’’ numbers.
During a day spent at Luton, however, the frustrations of court users emerge. For a start, this magistrates court now covers the whole of Bedfordshire, the old Bedford magistrates court having been mothballed. “Any defendant from Bedford or surrounding villages now needs to travel to Luton, which is a 20-mile journey, and relatively difficult to manage, especially if you are on benefits,” says Stephen Halloran, director at the law firm Lawtons.
Vinod Jumnoodoo, director at another local firm, JSP Law Ltd, suspects this has contributed to a rising number of “no-shows” – of which there were four in court three when the Guardian visited on Thursday. “A train leaving Bedford at 9.05am will get to Luton at 9.19am. That train ticket will cost £15.70. Imagine stumping up for that if you’re on benefits?” says Jumnoodoo. Add to that the costs in court time of arresting and processing the absconder.
It is not a local problem. Forty-seven magistrates courts closed their doors between March and September under government proposals to reduce the £500m annual cost of the courts estate, and a further 45 are due to shut by September 2017, meaning one-fifth of all courts in England and Wales will have disappeared in 19 months.
Whether high travel costs are a factor or not, there is a brief lull for the magistrates in court three one hour into their day. The usher is juggling her list to funnel through those pleading guilty in timely fashion, but someone is late, and others are waiting to see a duty solicitor.
Jo Cestaro and Dawn McKnight, from Lawton, are on the duty solicitors’ rota this day, as is James Bailey-Woodward from JSP Law. Legal aid cuts have meant more unrepresented defendants, which has meant more people seeing duty solicitors at the court on their first appearances.
Cestaro finds herself defending a 23-year-old man, who has pleaded guilty to driving while disqualified and without insurance. It is not his first such offence and he has racked up £5,000 in outstanding fines. He is unemployed, and it is a huge burden.
One sitting magistrate, unconnected to Luton, has told the Guardian how demoralising it is to see defendants accruing fine on top of fine, with no hope of paying. More should be done, he believes, to encourage people facing driving offences to deal with it out of court. “In court fines are larger than if a person just filled in the paperwork. It is usually the poor who don’t have insurance, and the less well educated who don’t understand how to fill in the forms.”
Cestaro’s disqualified driver seems a case in point. He has diagnosed depression, a terminally ill sister, family problems, a mountain of debt and no job. The magistrates call for a pre-sentencing probation report. “Do be frank and candid; it can only help you,” the chairman of the bench says as the defendant departs with a probation services officer for interview.
Thirty minutes later, the probation report is read aloud. Magistrates decide on an eight-week prison sentence, suspended for 12 months, and 15 “RAR” – rehabilitation activity requirement – days. He is banned from driving for 25 months, and while there is no additional fine, he still must pay £200 – £85 prosecution costs and £115 victim surcharge, which can only be consolidated with his current fines.
Once cases could be adjourned for three weeks for a pre-sentencing written probation report. Today, they can be completed almost instantly. It appears highly efficient. But there are fears that quality may suffer. “It is a very, very brief interview. The reports are becoming a tick-box pro forma, and are more scant than they used to be without a shadow of doubt,” says Jumnoodoo. Crown court cases take precedence, and magistrates quite often find probation reports not being prepared on time, says one JP, who does not sit at Luton.
Cuts mean the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) is also stretched, say lawyers, leading to papers not being available either to defence solicitors or magistrates on time. Often there is only a case summary, drawn up by police, which when actual statements arrive, after delay, “bears no resemblance to reality”, says Jumnoodoo.
Prosecutors are travelling further and being parachuted into courts they weren’t expecting to deal with, he adds: “Downtrodden prosecutors now are not too shy to simply state to the court: ‘I can’t deal with that file/ I haven’t read it.’”
There is a sense that continuing cuts can lead to a dislocation nationwide between such courts and the communities they serve, with defendants, prosecutors and magistrates all travelling further, to courts rarely covered by their local newspapers.
Back in court three, business goes on without too many apparent problems. Warrants for the arrests for the “no-shows” are issued. A 29-year-old unemployed man, accused of biting a police officer in the thigh while under arrest for brandishing his belt as a weapon outside McDonald’s and refusing a blood specimen test, receives an 18-week sentence suspended for 12 months, a driving ban and fines and compensation totalling £570. The 18-year-old he got into an altercation with, and who also brandished his belt, receives a 12-month community order, 150 hours’ community service, and £170 in costs. Both get a 7pm-7am curfew.
But Bailey-Woodward from JSP Law, who is representing a woman accused of shoplifting, is forced to wait several hours for her papers to arrive, only to discover she is not, as assumed, pleading guilty, but entering a not guilty plea. A trial date is set for February.
The aim, drummed into magistrates during their training, is not to clog the system. They are trained to adjourn only “in extraordinary circumstances”, says one Luton magistrate who has spent 26 years on the bench, and who does not wish to be named. “Some days you work solidly. Others, you wonder why you bothered to come. The number of times something or someone is missing, or people have sent the papers over too late, or not at all.” But he has great sympathy with the CPS staff, “who are under a lot of pressure”.
One way courts can relieve that pressure is by “undercharging”, it is claimed. “Instead of GBH, you will get charged with an ABH. Instead of ABH you will get charged with an assault. Just to encourage people to plead to a lesser offence,” says Halloran.
Overall, the number of people being processed and charged has “drastically dropped”, and volumes are down significantly, he adds, “and it cannot all be down to the work of the youth offending team. The reality is that the police/CPS, unless they have overwhelming evidence, won’t charge an offence or they will try to divert it, just to save money.”
The system is “creaking” he says, and relies on the goodwill of those involved to keep the show on the road.
Goodwill is there. It’s there in the form of the 33-year-old mother of two young children, now in her last days of training to become a magistrate at Luton. Juggling being a magistrate with her job and motherhood is not going to be easy. “The system is not set up for people who are younger and have these other commitments,” she says. However, she is determined.
And despite his 26 years on the bench, the longstanding Luton JP remains committed. As an ex-headmaster, he laments the reduction in the number of youth courts at Luton, from two a week to just half a day a week. Here he felt he could make a real difference. Now the less serious youth offences never reach court, and the really serious cases are sent up to crown courts, which have greater sentencing powers, he says.
But, he adds: “I’m still doing it. It is still worth doing. It is still working, but it is creaking”.
The number of unpaid magistrates in England and Wales has declined steeply from 30,000 in 2006 to 17,500 today.
Court closures, falling crime rates and a relative increase in the number of full-time district judges have all been blamed for the fall.
But the main reason magistrates – also known as justices of the peace (JPs) – cite for resigning is the long distances they are forced to travel to court, which has broken the link between benches and their local communities.
About 250 magistrates courts, youth courts and county courts have closed since 2010 as part of a coordinated cost-cutting drive. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) argues that 95% of defendants should be able to reach their local court within an hour by car. Keeping to the speed limit, that implies many will be up to 70 miles away.
Approximately 53% of magistrates are women and 89% are white. Many benches have no or few members from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds. More than 86% are over the age of 50.
Their sense of being undervalued has been sharpened by the belief that professional district judges are given the more interesting and complex cases.
Malcolm Richardson, the national chairman of the Magistrates Association, told the Guardian: “A number of resigning magistrates cite issues such as court closures and overall dissatisfaction caused by the lack of respect with which they are treated by the system as core reasons for leaving. Some considerable talent and thousands of years’ experience are lost as a result.
“Government needs to come up with a strategy for the magistracy and then start recruiting and use that opportunity to broaden the range of people sitting as magistrates. Contrary to popular belief, the magistracy is actually quite reflective of the demographics of England and Wales in ethnicity terms, but not age.”
The Magistrates Association is encouraging more working-age people to join the bench in order to lower the average age of JPs.
It has also argued for magistrates to be given greater sentencing powers, a request endorsed by the Commons’ justice select committee in the autumn which warned there was a need to tackle low morale in the service. 
The government has so far resisted extending the magistracy’s sentencing powers from a maximum of six months to 12 months for a single offence. Authority for it to do so already exists under section 154 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 but this has never been brought into force. 
Ministers and some civil rights groups fear it would lead to more offenders being sent to already overcrowded prisons.
The Conservative MP Bob Neill, who chairs the justice select committee, said in October: “It is unfortunate that the government’s evident goodwill towards the magistracy has not yet been translated into any meaningful strategy for supporting and developing it within a changing criminal justice system. This needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency.
“Although evidence does not indicate a universal problem, there is sufficient evidence of low morale within the magistracy to cause concern.”
Penelope Gibbs, a former magistrate and director of the campaign group Transform Justice, said at the time: “Magistrates themselves have lighted on increased sentencing powers … as the answer to their problems. It would give magistrates courts more work, but it risks increasing prison numbers and decreasing the number of trials heard by juries. The government and the senior judiciary need to halt the downward drift in magistrate numbers and devise a strategy to save the magistracy, not enact one measure which may have perverse effects.”
An MoJ spokesperson said: “The magistracy remains at the heart of our justice system, and we will consider the case for increasing their sentencing powers.
“Closing underused and dilapidated court buildings will allow us to reinvest in the justice system and make the best use of technology.
“This will improve access to justice and improve the experience for all court users, in particular vulnerable victims and witnesses.”
Company investigated over allegations of bribery maintains anti-corruption agency misused its legal powers
The Rev Mike and the Rev Nicky-Sue Terry have the classic married couple’s habit of finishing each other’s sentences. But perhaps it’s unsurprising that they know each other’s minds so well. They are not just man and wife, but also two halves of a pioneering job-share within the Church of England, splitting the role of vicar for St Mary’s in the Hampshire village of Warsash between them.
They take turns conducting services, he chairs parish council meetings, she runs the pastoral team, and vicarage life is divided according to individual strengths, although both try to take Fridays off. Mike, who previously served in the Royal Navy, likes long-term planning; Nicky-Sue says she prefers “to get into the detail of things, which … ” – she pauses, and Mike interjects – “drives me completely barmy”. Some parishioners in distress are drawn to her, some to him, but they try to make the relationship seamless. “We have a phrase we use,” says Mike, “which is: ‘We are the vicar, we are.’”
And both are thrilled to have a way of working that suits them. Having entered the church late in life – Mike, now 60, met 54-year-old Nicky-Sue in 2007, when both were training for ordination – neither wanted to run a church full-time, and so when their bishop suggested an experimental job share, both were intrigued. “In a sense, this is the Church of England beginning to recognise that we can do things in a more flexible way, and can be responsive to a modern environment,” Mike adds. “It’s a very positive reflection on a changing world. And if the Church of England can do it, that says something.”
Thirteen years after Tony Blair’s government pushed through the legal right to request flexible working amid squeals of protest, it feels as if the last bastions of traditional working practices are finally being stormed. Change is lapping at the highest reaches of the establishment; the armed forces, parliament and the judiciary.
Next spring, a landmark report is due to be published exploring the feasibility of job-sharing for MPs, to encourage parents and disabled candidates into parliament. The Ministry of Defence is in the middle of a trial project, offering soldiers with young children the chance to defer deployment overseas or rejig chunks of leave to reduce their hours. The scheme will be opened to more service personnel from February.
Two unnamed judges recently began the high court’s first ever job-share, and last week it emerged that future vacancies on the supreme court will be open to flexible applications in the hope of attracting female judges. (Currently the ratio is one woman to 11 men.)
The next big leap in the story, says the Fawcett Society’s chief executive Sam Smethers, would be moving to a default assumption that every job can be made flexible in some way – early starts or finishes, home working, part-time work or job-sharing – unless there is good reason not to. But that means showing it can work even at the top, and in professions once stoutly resistant to change.
“It’s about opening minds and realising that a lot of the way we do things is just because we’ve always done it that way,” she adds, “not because that’s the way it has to be done. In most jobs there is some prospect of flexible working.”
The niggling question, however, is how firmly these painstaking gains for working parents are entrenched in workplace culture: there are fears that, in a potentially tougher economic climate post-Brexit, it might become too easy to roll back employment rights. This is why it is so intriguing that even professions granted exemption from the law are now voluntarily thinking the previously unthinkable.
The single biggest reason for leaving the armed forces, according to the annual Armed Forces Continuous Attitude Survey, is the impact on family life – and it’s not just affecting women. There is growing concern about promising male officers leaving in their 30s and early 40s, just as experience becomes invaluable, because of the toll taken on marriages and children. It is this prospect of troops voting with their feet that has prompted a rethink of the rigid patterns of army life.
If the role of military wives was once to stay at home raising children while their men were off at war, those days are long gone. Almost one in 10 soldiers is now female, many military spouses work, and too many struggle to fit that around their soldier’s long absences and unpredictable hours. In a recent survey for the Army Families Federation (AFF), which has campaigned for flexible working on forces families’ behalves, 39% of spouses said their partner couldn’t help with childcare even occasionally. (For soldiers not on active deployment, variable start times and other forms of flexibility may be be available, but the forces are exempt from the legal right to request).
“You can’t rely on your soldier to finish at fixed times. They’re away a lot and the burden of the childcare absolutely falls on the spouses,” explains Louise Simpson, policy and research director at the AFF, and an army wife herself.
“If you talk to an organisation like Recruit for Spouses, which helps military spouses return to work, they’re trying to place people who were in incredible jobs [before becoming] military spouses, who are now downsizing considerably and finding even that difficult. Employers look at their CVs and say: ‘Oh, we can’t have someone this highly qualified.’” Yet many spouses can’t afford, she says, not to work.
Simpson praises the army’s current chief of general staff, General Sir Nick Carter, who personally backed the flexible working experiment last year by declaring there was “absolutely no reason” for not changing parade times on a base so that soldiers could do the school run. Tiny changes could, Simpson says, make a big difference.
But the Ministry of Defence remains cautious about the impact on operational readiness to deploy. The trial will continue until at least 2019 before any final decision is taken.
Meanwhile, the AFF argues that more could be done to spread the message that modern couples both work and need to share the domestic load. “We need to educate our command that this is the way most people operate now, so if every now and then a soldier wants to leave at 4pm to pick up the kids, they could,” says Simpson. But there is some private anxiety about the consequences of taking up the offer: one new mother Simpson talked to recently said her soldier husband wouldn’t take up the scheme because he worried that “it would be an end to the fast track”. For both civilian and military parents, the key may be making sure that flexibility goes right to the top of the tree.
At first glance, judges make terrible candidates for part-time working, since the same judge must sit continuously through trials that can last weeks. But the crown court now has a handful of part-timers, working in blocks of several weeks on and several weeks off – and the supreme court’s cases are shorter and more predictable than criminal trials, which makes them potentially more amenable to part-timers if they were carefully matched to cases. A final decision has yet to be taken on what kind of hours will be accepted, but crucially, candidates won’t have to declare that they want to work flexibly unless they are short-listed, meaning their CVs should be sifted purely on merit.
Since most supreme court justices are in their late 50s and 60s, the changes are unlikely to attract new mothers, but could suit someone seeking reduced hours because they are caring for an elderly parent, or to see teenagers through A-levels. And more than that, it sends a powerful signal through the system. “What we’re saying is that, actually, we appreciate people are looking to us to take the lead,” said a spokesman for the supreme court.
What kind of boss denies women the legal right to maternity leave, requires them to commute hundreds of miles a week and calls them lazy if they complain? The answer, technically, is all of us. MPs are not legally employees, but servants of the people, and the people can be unforgiving bosses. Ironically, the law on working life is currently made by people whose working conditions would be illegal almost anywhere else.
The Labour MP Rachel Reeves has just written a biography of the pioneering Labour minister Alice Bacon, Alice in Westminster, in which she reflects on how life has changed for female politicians since Alice’s election in 1945. “The hours have massively changed, the through-the-night sittings that existed in her day – the latest I’ve been there is maybe 1.30am,” says Reeves, who has two children under three years old. “There’s a nursery now, whereas when Alice was an MP very few women had children. There was a feeling you couldn’t have both. Those are choices that women are much less willing to make now.”
But the flipside of afternoon and evening sittings was that some MPs in Alice’s day treated parliament as a part-time job, pursuing careers in law or the City during the day. Time could be interestingly elastic, if what you wanted was the freedom to make money, not the freedom to see your children.
And while back then established MPs might have deigned to visit their constituency only once a year, the weekly shuttle back and forth is the bane of many modern political parents’ lives. Since there’s no way around the need to live in two places at once without breaking the constituency link, there is growing interest in job-sharing, with two candidates standing for parliament on one ticket and dividing the work between them.
Two Green activists, Sarah Cope and Clare Phipps, brought an unsuccessful court case last year arguing they should be allowed to stand for parliament as a job-share, and this week the Green MP Caroline Lucas – who shares her own party’s leadership with Jonathan Bartley – once again backed the idea.
But it remains controversial, dividing even those passionate about opening up parliament. Reeves thinks ministerial posts could be shared relatively easily, but worries about how an MP job-share would cope if its two halves disagreed over an unexpected issue, such as the vote on bombing Syria: “For me, that was an incredibly difficult decision. I had friends who politically I’m very close to who voted the other way. I’m not sure how you agree that in advance. Do you just say: ‘Well, it’s a Wednesday, so that’s Rachel’s day to vote?’ That doesn’t feel right. I personally think it’s incredibly difficult.”
Nonetheless, two academics, Bristol University’s Prof Sarah Childs – author of a separate recent report on diversifying the Commons, currently being studied by a working group of MPs – and Birkbeck University’s Dr Rosie Campbell, are examining the practical challenges for a report due next spring.
The urgent priority for many in Westminster, however, remains dragging arrangements for new parents into the 21st century. Ministers have been able to take maternity leave since 2001, but new mothers still have no formal right to time off constituency work. Most muddle through, reliant on the goodwill of whips to excuse them from voting at Westminster, while braced for criticism over their temporarily patchy presence. Reeves recalls signing casework shortly after her second child was born last June, and resuming constituency surgeries within six weeks. Despite being signed off Westminster votes for four months, she turned up to vote on Syria and tax credit cuts. “I was never completely off,” she says, before adding hastily, “but I’m sure that’s true for people in other jobs as well.”
Why don’t MPs complain more about conditions most parents wouldn’t tolerate? Reeves snorts incredulously at the question: “Because you get no sympathy!” Besides, she says, there’s flexibility in the school holidays when MPs work from their constituencies. “I don’t think we have loads to complain about. We’re a bit like self-employed people, who can’t take maternity leave because it’s going to cost you.”
The snail’s pace of reform in parliament undoubtedly reflects private fears of a backlash from voters still smarting over the expenses scandal. But Childs remains optimistic about the prospects for change, arguing that it is in nobody’s interest if MPs “have to rely on good relations with the whips” to get time off to recover from childbirth.
She is struck, too, by the way the wave of SNP MPs elected in 2015 are starting to change the dynamic. Used to the more modern Scottish parliament, which keeps something closer to office hours, she says they are much more willing to question stuffier traditions: “They’re able to make comparisons, and they look around and say: ‘Why are we doing this the way we do?’”
And as the two vicars of St Mary’s found out, that can be a life-changing question. “When we started, it was an experiment; we had no sense that we would do what we do now,” says Nicky-Sue, who thinks a job share might never have occurred to them without their bishop’s prompting. “But there’s something very symbolic about it, a married couple sharing a post like this. It’s perhaps a challenging concept. But it’s a beautiful one.”
The Dorchester’s leaked list of grooming rules for female staff could open up the luxury hotel to lawsuits filed by current and former employees, critics have said.
A set of grooming demands was this week reported to have been emailed by hotel managers to employees after the five-star establishment received complaints about the general hygiene of its staff.
According to the leak, women were asked not to turn up for work with oily skin, bad breath or garish makeup. They were also encouraged to shave their legs, ensure their fingernails were manicured and avoid body odour.
Kiran Daurka, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said dress codes were lawful when they related directly to the requirements of a job, but could be challenged when they encouraged the objectification of staff.
“I would have concerns where a policy seemingly objectifies women by asking them to look a certain way which has no bearing on their ability to do a job,” she told the Guardian. “For example, hair removal is clearly about objectification and sexualisation, as there is some ideal of what a woman should look like.
“This may also unlawfully offend the religious or other beliefs of women whose belief system does not allow the removal of hair.
“A dress code that treats women less favourably than men is discriminatory. But even where a policy is applied to all, it may still particularly disadvantage women, and that disadvantage would need to be objectively justified.”
An unnamed employee told the Daily Mail: “It’s disgusting. This list is like something out of the dark ages and downright offensive. It’s not as though you choose to have oily skin, and a lot of women, especially teenagers, cannot help it – no facial wash or moisturiser in the world can control that.
“The women are all pretty livid but worry that if they complain – or rebel and turn up to work with chipped, dirty nails and hairy legs, for example – they’ll be sacked on the spot.”
Philip Landau, an employment lawyer from Landau Law, said there were many reasons why an employer may want to have a dress code or appearance policy, such as to communicate a professional and corporate image. However, “an employer’s policy must not be discriminatory in respect of the protected characteristics in the 2010 Equality Act for age, disability, gender reassignment, religion or belief, sex, or sexual orientation”, he said.
“Accordingly, any dress code or appearance policy should apply to both men and women equally. The codes do not have to be identical, as there will clearly be different requirements for male staff, but it does have to amount to similar standards. It is not clear what the equivalent grooming policy is for male staff at the Dorchester.
“A grooming policy should also be reasonable and proportionate in nature, with particular reference to the work that is being carried out. If it isn’t, and you are dismissed for failing to comply with the code, you may have a claim for direct discrimination on the grounds of sex if there has been a detriment for one gender over the other. You may also have a claim for unfair dismissal.”
Landau said employers needed to “tread carefully” in case they were seen to indirectly discriminate against an employee. The requirement not to display any excess body hair, including on the face, could discriminate against those with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), of which one of the main symptoms is excess androgen – high levels of “male hormones” in the body.
“This may cause physical signs, such as excess facial or body hair, and therefore a blanket policy of no facial hair could amount to indirect discrimination on the grounds of disability and sex,” he said.
Ewa Jasiewicz, a union organiser for hotel workers in London, said she believed the stipulations left workers open to discrimination, especially if they were transgender or gender fluid. “Gender is a protected characteristic under the Equality Act and this includes gender presentation and reassignment,” Jasiewicz said.
“Women workers at the Dorchester do not enjoy transparency on where their service charge goes and do not have fair tips or [a] living wage, but are expected to spend money on manicures? This beggars belief. This in my opinion is a form of paternalistic, sexist, gendered taxation on an already exploited and underpaid female workforce.”
The Unite regional officer Dave Turnbull said: “People of different ethnic backgrounds may not be able to comply with the requirements due to their skin or hair type.
“It is possible that there is an underlying race issue here, as we are often told by members that hotels do try to avoid having black people in front-of-house position and it could easily be interpreted that the Dorchester are trying to get female staff to conform to a certain type.
“Also there are religions where the removal of facial hair may not be acceptable. There may be disability issues linked to this as well, for example skin conditions or allergies to certain types of makeup.”
To apply these standards only to female staff would be clearly sexist, he said. “It treats women workers as if they are part of the product that is being sold by the hotel and can place staff at risk of sexual harassment and comments from customers who might view them as a commodity.”
Workers in the Dorchester and other hotels were on low basic pay and often reliant on variable elements, such as tips or service charges, to top up their earnings, Turnbull said. “The cost of makeup, beauty treatments and compliance with dress code requirements can be extremely expensive and is never factored in by an additional allowance of any sort. Again, this could easily place employers at risk of claims of sex discrimination, as male employees are not expected to shoulder the same expenses.”
An employee at another London hotel, who asked to remain anonymous, said she was subjected to similar rules. She told the Guardian her main issue was that female employees had to wear tight dresses, which was “unfair and impractical” for her waitressing job. It also opened her up to unwanted comments from colleagues and guests. “If I’m cleaning a table, male workers will say things like: ‘Oh, stay right there,’” she said.
While the rules do not stipulate that the waitress must remove any facial hair, the 24-year-old, employed by a boutique hotel frequented by wealthy clients, said she had to wear skin-coloured tights rather than black ones, which meant having to shave her legs regularly, and that there was an expectation to look attractive. “We’re told that we have to dress as if we’re on our first date,” she said.
Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said it was completely unacceptable for any woman to be told what she should wear and how she should look. “Employers should concentrate on what enables people to do a good job and what drives productivity. This is 2016, not 1970; we need to see an end to this kind of objectification of women,” she said.
The Dorchester said the rules were not emailed to all staff, but were provided to job applicants. The hotel’s general manager, Roland Fasel, said: “The Dorchester has a proud community of employees who uphold world-leading hospitality standards, including grooming, in line with many other brands.
“All new applicants, both men and women, are sent a copy of our grooming standards in advance of interview.”
Immigrants detained for months and even years by the federal government should have no right to a bond hearing to determine whether their detention is necessary or justified. That might seem like an extreme statement. It is. But it’s not coming from Donald Trump. That’s what lawyers for the Obama administration this week argued before the US supreme court in Jennings v Rodriguez.
Non-citizens, including lawful permanent residents, are often locked up for lengthy periods in prison-like conditions while fighting deportation proceedings. That’s a result of a 1996 law, signed by President Bill Clinton, which made detention mandatory for a huge swath of immigrants convicted of crimes – even minor ones and even cases where an immigrant poses no public safety or flight risk.
It’s a remarkable case that encapsulates the absurd brutality of contemporary immigration politics: so-called moderates like Clinton, George Bush and Barack Obama have built and defended a monstrously efficient deportation machine that will soon be handed over to a hardcore nativist.
As of October, a record 40,000-plus immigrants, including many asylum seekers, were detained by the federal government, mostly in private facilities. That number that could grow much larger under Trump. The president-elect has pledged to orchestrate mass deportations and also promised to freeze federal hiring, which could make an already severely backlogged immigration court system grind to nearly a halt. It’s no surprise that private prison company stocks soared after Trump’s win.
“If the president-elect means what he says on detention and means what he says on the hiring freeze, inevitably detention times are going to skyrocket,” said Michael Tan, a staff attorney with the ACLU’s Immigrants’ Rights Project and one of the attorneys on the case.
The Obama administration’s response is that immigrants can file habeas corpus petitions in federal court – a complicated and time-consuming process that would provide no due process for most immigrants subject to imprisonment by the federal government.
The case before the supreme court is a class-action lawsuit represented by Alejandro Rodriguez, a lawful permanent resident brought to the United States as an infant whom the government sought to deport because of convictions for drug possession and “joyriding”. Rodriguez was imprisoned for more than three years with no bond hearing while he fought deportation – a fight he ultimately won.
In fact, it is the very people detained for lengthy periods like Rodriguez who are most likely to win their cases and be allowed to remain in the US because they have substantive claims to make. Those without such claims are typically subject to rapid deportation.
“The sad irony is the people who have the strongest claim to lawful status in the United States are the most likely to end up in detention for months or years without ever being able to see a judge and seek relief,” said Tan.
Those detained for six months or longer, according to the ACLU, are five times more likely to win their case than the average immigration detainee.
Though Trump has made brazen racism and xenophobia the centerpiece of his political persona, his policy agenda echoes that pursued by Obama: deporting those convicted of crimes. But the majority of those detained by immigration authorities for six months or longer, according to the ACLU, were convicted of crimes so minor that they carried a conviction of no longer than six months.
The US court of appeals for the ninth circuit found that non-citizens like Rodriguez did have a right to a bond hearing every six months. The Obama administration disagreed and appealed to the supreme court.
In the 2003 case Demore v Kim, the supreme court ruled in favor of the government’s power to detain non-citizens for a limited amount of time without a bond hearing – a period that the court found, based on information provided by the government, averaged roughly five months for those fighting their deportation before the Board of Immigration Appeals. The problem, the government conceded in an August letter to the court, is that that figure is bogus. In reality, the average detention time for such non-citizens was more than a year.
The government, according to Scotusblog’s bloodless analysis, is in part relying on the 1953 case Shaughnessy v United States ex rel Mezei, which “denied judicial review to an immigrant held in indefinite detention based on secret evidence, an outcome next to impossible to square with modern constitutional law.”
Trump has made it clear that he has little respect for constitutional rights. Obama’s dismal record will make it all the easier for the president-elect to shred them.
What does a perpetrator of violence against women look like? For many, the question still evokes images of shadowy strangers pouncing in the dark or thuggish drunken husbands stumbling home from football matches – stereotypes challenged tirelessly by women’s organisations and campaigners, especially throughout the current 16 days of action against gender-based violence.
In reality, women are statistically most likely to be assaulted by someone known to them, and domestic abuse can be, and is, also perpetrated by handsome middle-class professionals. Busting myths is therefore a crucial tool in the fight against a culture which relies on them. But for all these vital and urgent conversations about the true face of perpetrators, there is one that remains largely invisible in spite of both ubiquity and power: the state itself.
Violence does not exist solely in the instant that blow meets body, but in the circumstances that facilitate it and the systems which excuse it. One needs only glance at violent crime statistics since 2009 to spot a sharp increase in violence affecting women, correlating neatly with the introduction of austerity measures in the same year which have since seen 34 women’s refuges close and 95% of women’s organisations facing a funding crisis. The subsequent diversion of the tampon tax into women’s charities, while widely hailed as a feminist victory, in fact achieved little more than imposing the financial burden of their own health and support services on to women, while men continue to enjoy state-funded “mainstream” care.
Changes to the welfare system, too, illustrate at best a naivety around violence against women and at worst a complicity; for all the widely acknowledged flaws of universal credit, for example, little has been made of the stipulation to pay it only to one “head of household”, limiting the financial autonomy of women and gifting abusive partners ammunition by which to keep their victims hostage.
If economic policy too accurately embodies its violent language of slashing and cutting, legislation around crime and justice delivers an almost laughable irony. In some cases, the very laws purportedly designed to protect women from violence can, in practice, enable it: the criminalisation of various activities relating to the sale of sex, for example, is universally opposed by sex worker-organising collectives, on the grounds that it limits their ability to work safely – for instance, in groups or designated zones – and without fear of violence from both clients and state agencies.
When women do experience violence at the hands of a male perpetrator, as 1 in 4 UK women will in their lifetimes, a tangle of state systems and institutions make the path to justice anything but easy, despite the criminalisation of such violence in law. Cuts to legal aid, for instance, disproportionately affect women bringing claims of sexual violence and domestic abuse, and that’s if they haven’t already been put off by the degrading and painful experiences that women before them have legally faced in the UK justice system, or the country’s unrealistically low prosecution rate for gender-based violence.
Women’s experience of such state-sanctioned violence does, of course, differ based on individual identities, and predictably those also marginalised elsewhere are both hardest hit and affected in unique ways: a lack of affordable housing trapping women in poverty in abusive relationships; black women living in fear of police brutality; trans women routinely placed into male prisons with little regard for their increased vulnerability to sexual violence and suicide there.
In particular, refugee and migrant women remain especially at risk of state violence, in large part through their interactions with detention centres like Yarl’s Wood, where a protest tomorrow aims to oppose the inhumane treatment of detainees including the prevalence of sexual violence against women held in the facility. These are the findings that Theresa May, then home secretary, last year refused to disclose details of for fear of “prejudicing commercial interests” – a stark assertion of exactly where this government’s priorities lie when it comes to the safety of vulnerable women.
Taken as a whole, then, the picture in the UK is one where women still face epidemic levels of violence, but lack the support of a state which at best enables and at worst perpetrates it. It’s time to move beyond an understanding of violence against women as a personal issue between individuals, and see it as a strategy built into our institutions and society in order to maintain a status quo where women – particularly the most marginalised – are subordinated.
Politicians are good at talking the talk: “No woman should live in fear of violence and every girl should grow up knowing she is safe,” reads May’s foreword in the government’s Ending Violence Against Women and Girls strategy. But until her own actions and that of her government say otherwise, this noble vision remains far from realised.
Company investigated over allegations of bribery maintains anti-corruption agency misused its legal powers
Scotland’s minimum age of criminal responsibility will be raised to 12 years, in line with UN standards, after the current minimum age of eight, the lowest in Europe, was labelled a “national embarrassment”.
Mark McDonald, minister for childcare and early years, announced on Thursday afternoon that the Scottish government would bring forward legislation to raise the age by four years, calling the case for it “clear and compelling”.
In a statement to Holyrood, McDonald told MSPs: “Having the lowest minimum age of criminal responsibility in Europe does not match with our progressive approach to youth justice and ambitions to give children the best start in life.”
A recent consultation with police, prosecutors and victims’ groups found that 95% supported an increase to the age of 12 or above.
In 2010, the Scottish government raised the age of criminal prosecution to 12, assuring that no one under that age could be prosecuted or sentenced in the criminal courts but would be dealt with through children’s hearings. However, those outcomes would still be added to children’s criminal records.
McDonald said: “Raising the age of criminal responsibility will mean people no longer face potentially damaging and life-altering consequences, such as a criminal record, for events that took place when they were a young child.”
He added that he recognised the need for safeguards in exceptional cases, and that police would still have powers to investigate serious offences committed by children under 12s.
The minimum age of criminal responsibility in England and Wales is 10. The UN committee on the rights of the child has stated that setting the age of criminal responsibility below 12 is considered “not to be internationally acceptable”.
Liam McArthur MSP, the Scottish Liberal Democrat justice spokesperson, welcomed the decision. His predecessor in the role Alison McInnes advocated the rise, but her attempts to alter the law by bringing forward amendments to a criminal justice bill in the last Holyrood session were voted down by the SNP.
McDonald told the chamber on Thursday that he wanted to put on the record his thanks to McInnes for pressing the issue. McArthur likewise praised her “tireless work”, adding: “Eight-year-olds should be treated as children not criminals. The fact they can receive convictions which need to be declared for decades, or even the rest of their lives, is a national embarrassment.”
The acting chair of the Scottish youth parliament, Amy Lee Fraioli MSYP, also welcomed the move, adding that children and young people across Scotland felt strongly about the issue. “Raising the age of criminal responsibility from eight to 12 is an important step towards fully incorporating the UN convention on the rights of the child into Scots law. Many children who find themselves in children’s hearings are also victims themselves, and are often ill-equipped to deal with the situations they find themselves in. Raising the age will help ensure that Scotland is a fair place for children, and shift focus to supporting children instead of criminalising them.”
The government has been warned that up to 1 million EU citizens living in the UK could be at risk of deportation if it does not come up with a simple way of recognising their status in the country.
The 3 Million, a grassroots group lobbying for the rights of non-British citizens who have made the UK their home, has told the home secretary it would take the Home Office 47 years to process applications from EU citizens for permanent residency (PR). “We are people with families, children, friends and work colleagues, and we are rightly worried about a very uncertain future,” said Nicolas Hatton, chair of the 3 Million, in his letter to Amber Rudd.
“EU citizens have been feeling very anxious about their future since the referendum, and this set of data will not reassure them. We call on you to remove the threat of deportation without notice and give us, today, guarantees that all EU citizens living legally in the UK will be able to exercise their right to remain before the UK leaves the EU.”
Theresa May has consistently said that rights for EU citizens were a legitimate part of Brexit negotiations, but on Thursday night the government seemed to go one step further by indicating their rights could be removed if not reciprocated.
A Home Office spokesperson said: “The home secretary has been clear that she wants to protect the status of EU nationals already living here, and the only circumstances in which that wouldn’t be possible is if British citizens’ rights in European member states were not protected in return.”
The estimated time it would take the Home Office to deal with the 3 million EU citizens in the country is based on the latest immigration data, which shows a surge in applications for PR since the EU referendum, which has caused a backlog of 100,000 applications.
PR was designed for non-EU citizens who wished to settle in the UK and involves an 85-page application form. Applicants not only have to provide five years of council tax bills, bank statements or utility bills to demonstrate residency, but also have to document each time they have been in and out of the country since they arrived in the UK. 
Monika Lutke-Daldrup from Germany, who is an executive with a large European firm and lives in Watford, told the Guardian: “I travel about 20 times a year and I have been here for 18 years. It is ridiculous.”
Paola Rizatto said: “I am an educated person, but I found the 85-page form so overwhelming that I decided to hire an immigration lawyer. I have already spent around £1,000.”
Several mothers who have British children say they are not eligible for PR because their household bills are not in their names. “Just to be married to a British person or to have British children is not enough,” said one. Another, who asked not to be named, said she had been told to get her child’s school to sign a statement that she had been picking up her child each day for the past five years.
The 3 Million said the Home Office process for PR “is totally inconsistent and depends on what Home Office adviser you get”.
Data published on Thursday shows that 30% of applications are rejected, with many EU citizens unable to pass the paperwork test despite their legal right of residence as EU citizens.
If the government requires all non-Britons to join the non-EU immigrants in the permanent residency queue, up to 1 million could face deportation the day the UK leaves the EU. 
The Home Office said there had been “no change to the rights and status of EU nationals in the UK as a result of the referendum”. Its guidance was that EU citizens did not need to apply for permanent residence. “As such there is no requirement to register for documentation to confirm their status,” a spokesperson said.
A company that is implicated in an international bribery scandal has launched legal action against the Serious Fraud Office, alleging that the anti-corruption agency has unlawfully misused its powers.
The SFO is investigating Unaoil, a Monaco-based oil and gas firm, over allegations that it paid bribes to win contracts in several countries for dozens of multinationals, including the British engineering firm Rolls-Royce. According to the SFO, the alleged corruption is “very extensive”.
On Thursday, Unaoil opened its legal challenge in the high court in London, claiming that investigators working for the SFO unlawfully raided its headquarters in Monaco and seized a large cache of its documents, phones and computer equipment in a “cavalier” fashion. The firm alleges that the raid amounted to an “excessively wide fishing expedition rather than a proper exercise of” its legal powers.
Unaoil has denied all wrongdoing. In its submission to Lord Justice Gross and Mr Justice Nicol, Unaoil described how the SFO asked the police in Monaco to raid its HQ in March and used a truck to transport the seized material to the UK.
The raid was initiated after the SFO started investigating corruption allegations involving Unaoil, Rolls-Royce and an Australian multinational, according to Unaoil’s submission. The allegations related to transactions in Iraq dating back to 2005, the submission said.
Hugo Keith, a QC acting for Unaoil, alleged that the SFO’s request to the Monaco police to carry out the raid “lacked candour” and had misled them over the seriousness and urgency of the reasons for the raid.
Ata Ahsani, chairman of Unaoil, and his two sons, Cyrus and Saman, are seeking a court order quashing the legality of the raid, compelling the SFO to return the seized material and destroy any copies it holds.
A day after the raid in March, reporters at Australia’s Fairfax Media alleged – based on a leak of thousands of Unaoil’s documents – that the firm had systematically corrupted the global oil industry, distributing millions of dollars of bribes on behalf of Rolls-Royce and other multinationals which were seeking to secure contracts.
Rolls-Royce said it was fully co-operating with investigations into the allegations and could not comment in detail.
The SFO is opposing Unaoil’s legal challenge, maintaining that its actions were legal. In its defence, the SFO said it had “significant grounds to suspect” that Unaoil had “paid bribes and/or conspired together to pay bribes to high-ranking Iraqi and other public officials on behalf of” its clients.
The agency, which said its investigation was not limited to alleged bribery to Iraqi officials, added that Unaoil was “under investigation for the payment of a series of large bribes to government officials and officers of state in a number of countries in relation to the oil and gas sector”.
Jonathan Hall, the SFO’s QC, told the court that the agency “had reasonable grounds to suspect that Unaoil’s main activity is the paying of bribes on behalf of western oil infrastructure companies and the corrupting of tendering exercises to favour its clients”.
The SFO said it was concerned “that the effect of this flawed claim [by Unaoil] – whether that is its purpose or otherwise – will be to delay and disrupt an ongoing criminal investigation into serious fraud and corruption”.
Judgment will be given at a later date.
Life has not been easy for Paradise Sorouri. In the past seven years, the 27-year-old has been forced to flee her country twice, received more death threats than she can count, and was brutally beaten by 10 men on the street and left to die. Her crime? She covers her head with a baseball cap instead of a hijab, raises her voice for women’s rights, and is Afghanistan’s first female rapper.
In a country where, according to the UN, 87% of women have endured physical or sexual violence, Paradise’s scathing lyrics about gender inequality in post-Taliban Afghanistan have served as a spark for change and a lightning rod for controversy. She raps defiantly in Dari about how women can get acid poured on their faces for resisting rape, be married off as children to older men, and belong to husbands who can set them on fire.
“It doesn’t matter if you are a singer, an artist, or a teacher,” says Paradise. “If you are a woman in Afghanistan, you are a problem. I am speaking out and fighting for women who don’t have a voice.”
Speaking out has come at a price, but it has also garnered support. Paradise was recognised by the UN in 2013 for promoting human rights, while she and her fiance Diverse – together they are known as 143Band – won the Afghan ATN network’s award for best rap act in 2015. The duo are nominated again this year.
But as her popularity soared, so did the number of violent threats she received. Fearing for their safety, last year she and Diverse fled Afghanistan and joined the more than one million migrants who arrived in Germany from the Middle East. 
In the process, the pair have begun to reach an entirely new audience, writing and producing songs in their Berlin flat and touring throughout Germany. They release their first music video in two years next month for the song Bosaye Eshgh, they’ve just headlined at the international FeminEast festival in Stockholm, and Rebel Beats, a documentary about Paradise’s struggle as Afghanistan’s first female rapper, will appear in European film festivals early next year.
Born in Iran to Afghan parents who escaped the country’s civil war, Paradise moved back to Herat, Afghanistan’s third largest city, with her family following the fall of the Taliban. She grew up idolising Tupac, Eminem and Beyoncé though didn’t know anyone who shared her love of hip-hop until she met Diverse – another former refugee just back from Iran. The two decided to start making music together in 2008, but the odds were against them.
“Herat is a very religious city,” says Diverse. “Sharia law forbids women to sing. The fact that we are not married was also a problem. Every time we’d try to go to a studio together, strangers would start following us.”
One night, Paradise was walking home with her younger brother when 10 men on six motorcycles surrounded her and started beating her with wooden rods. “They were shouting at me and saying I was a bad influence on other women by trying to make music,” Paradise says. “All I could do was to try to defend my brother. They passed me from one man to the next. I begged people nearby to help, but they just urged the men to beat me to death.”
When Diverse found her, Paradise’s clothes were torn and she was covered in blood. He immediately took her to the police. “They told me I should stop singing,” says Paradise. “That’s when I knew that if I stayed silent, nothing would change.”
Fearful of what might happen if they stayed in Herat, the couple moved to neighbouring Tajikistan in late 2010, where Paradise began writing songs about women’s rights over Diverse’s beats. The following year, they released Faryad-e Zan (Woman’s Shout), the first song ever to feature a female Afghan rapper. In the years since, Paradise says she feels “proud and honoured” to have ushered in a handful of other female rappers, even if several have claimed to be the country’s first while simultaneously asking her for guidance.
During the next two years, the duo recorded nine more songs and shot five videos in the relative safety of Tajikistan. Then, in the summer of 2012, Paradise received horrific news: back in Herat, to avoid being married off to men in their 60s, her two young cousins – aged nine and 12 – had burned themselves alive.
Devastated, Paradise returned to Afghanistan and recorded a song in their memory called Nalestan. “I wanted to think and they hit me in the head,” she sang. “They burned my face in the name of Islam / And sold me because I’m only a woman.” The song won international attention, with 143Band named Afghanistan’s best rap artist at the 2014 Rumi world music awards.
“The success of Nalestan was both good and bad,” Paradise says. “We were interviewed by journalists from all over the world, but I started to get death threats every day. It got so bad I had to stay inside my sister’s house in Herat for a month like a prisoner.” Still, Paradise and Diverse were convinced their message of female empowerment would be more effective if they stayed in Afghanistan, so they relocated once more, this time to Kabul.
When Rebel Beats began filming in early 2015, a woman named Farkhunda – who was falsely accused of burning the Qur’an – had just been beaten to death and set alight by an angry mob in the street. The daily barrage of threats directed at Paradise had also reached a fever pitch and, throughout the film, she anxiously looks over her shoulder to see if she’s being watched.
At one point, the camera holds on a stony-faced Paradise as she reads message after message directed at her on 143Band’s Facebook page. Several men describe wanting to rape and behead her in front of Diverse. Another says he’ll throw acid on her if he ever sees her in person. The only time she breaks is when she’s asked about Farkhunda. “She has made me stronger,” Paradise says, fighting back the tears. “I will fight – not only for Farkhunda, but for all the Farkhundas.”
A month after the cameras stopped rolling, Paradise and Diverse left Afghanistan for good and began the arduous process of resettling in Berlin. Paradise is still fighting and is scheduled to speak at Talking Taboo, an international conference for women’s rights in London on 2 December.
“The people of Afghanistan still need our voice,” she says. “From here, we can make it louder.”
Extra legal powers may be needed to prosecute hate preachers who encourage violent radicalisation in private conversations, according to the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation.
In his final report after six years in the influential post, David Anderson QC says the requirement in the 2006 Terrorism Act that such persuasion needs to be “published” or delivered at a meeting should be re-examined.
“That change might make it possible to use undercover officers for the purposes of gathering evidence against those who are inspiring terrorists,” he suggests.
It may also be necessary to specify more clearly “examples of ways in which support for a proscribed organisation could be invited”, he explains. “Prosecutors with experience of such cases have told me that this could assist juries in matching the alleged conduct to the offence.”
Anderson, who stands down in February, was not formally recommending such changes but believed there should be a more detailed inquiry. “I offer them for discussion as a possible partial solution to the problems of prosecuting hate preachers,” he writes, “and in the spirit that our freedoms are better protected by a well-functioning criminal law than they are by a system based on coercive civil orders of broad and uncertain scope.”
Anderson says: “It is entirely fair to ask why the law did not catch up with Anjem Choudary [who was convicted of inviting support for Daesh earlier this year] sooner.” He said the Crown Prosecution Service considered Choudary’s activities on 10 occasions between 2002 and 2015.
In general conclusions, Anderson observes: “Laws against terrorism need to bear down hard on all kinds of extremists who espouse violence: but it is important also that they do not alienate the rest of the population.”
He welcomes the steady decline in the number of so-called port stops, used to question and detain travellers to determine whether they are involved in terrorism. They have fallen from 87,218 in 2009-10 to 28,083 last year.
“My overall impression is that though port controls remain a frequently mentioned irritant, the terrorism acts are no longer the focus for grievance that they once were,” Anderson notes. “Indeed they have been overtaken as a source of grievance by aspects of the Prevent strategy to counter extremism.”
The terrorism acts, he says, “are a broadly proportionate reaction to the current threat”. He states: “I reject the false narrative of power-hungry security services, police insensitivity to community concerns, and laws constantly being ratcheted up to new levels of oppression.”
However, Brexit could damage the UK’s ability to lead European policy and promote European laws in the counter-terrorism field, Anderson says.
He adds: “There are strong operational reasons for maintaining access to EU mechanisms that others may devise. Brexit will not alter the fact that as crime [including terrorist crime] crosses borders with increasing ease, the same must be true of the information and resources that are needed by those who fight it.”
In the report, written after the murder of the Labour MP Jo Cox by the Nazi sympathiser Thomas Mair, Anderson says: “The organised extreme rightwing threat in the UK is … perceived by the authorities to be fragmented, with no unifying ideology or set of principles. 
“In a document provided to me by the national counter-terrorism policing operations centre in July 2016, the threat of organised XRW groups was described as … ‘limited to low-level protest and heated online debate’.”
There were no deaths or injuries from terrorism in Britain during 2015, the report says, “unless one counts the injuries sustained by Lyle Zimmerman at Leytonstone tube station in London in December”. In Northern Ireland, there were three security-related deaths in the year to 31 March 2016.
The report adds: “Outside Northern Ireland, there have been only two deaths in the UK from terrorist incidents since 56 people [including four British suicide bombers] were killed in the 7/7 London attacks of 2005. The continuation of that record is impressive.”
The threat remains, however: “Some attackers or would-be attackers leave only a very limited intelligence trace, particularly if their radicalisation has been swift. 
“Others come to the attention of the authorities but are not given the priority that their subsequent actions show them to have merited, often for understandable reasons. And as was demonstrated recently in Nice, even such an everyday object as a large motor vehicle can exact a horrible toll on the innocent when used by a person heedless of the consequences for his own life.”
In his parting comments, Anderson observes: “Human rights do not hamper the fight against terrorism and extremism: they underline its legitimacy.”
Much has been written recently about the shocking conditions inside Britain’s jails. Suicides are occurring on average once every three days, and prison inspectors said this week that conditions in HMP Hindley are among the worst they have ever seen.
It’s about time that prisons stopped being holiday camps. Or at least that is what the Daily Mail would encourage you to think. If you ask the average person on the street why someone would end up in prison, you are likely to get some version of: “Because they have chosen to break the law and have harmed someone else.” And on prison’s purpose? “They should be harsh places of punishment to set an example and act as a deterrent.”
I work in the criminal justice system and have committed a large proportion of my life to trying to support offenders to turn their lives around. So you might expect me to argue against that statement, to try to blame the wider socio-economic picture and present a social justice argument about how we are all to blame for the crimes committed by these men and women.
However I completely agree that those who choose to commit crime should face incarceration. That prisons should be well run by the prison staff; who as society’s representatives in prison should be setting the agenda, holding firm boundaries and delivering society’s intention to both punish the offender and to minimise the chances of them choosing to break the law in the future. So on that level, I believe that the current situation in prisons is a travesty. Prisons are chronically understaffed and the inmates have far more power than ever before.
Contraband is commonplace. Where there is contraband, there is trade and where there is trade, there are people who control that trade who have status and power that they will seek to maintain. We have allowed a situation to develop where prison becomes an environment where the very traits and tendencies that we would hope prison would diminish are in fact reinforced, as legitimate strategies for survival and for status.
Staff shortages are now so acute that in many prisons, prisoners are spending 23 hours a day locked up – denied access to education and training, exercise and other activity proved to decrease the likelihood to reoffending.
So even from that paradigm, of prisons being for people who have chosen to break the law, the situation in prisons is unacceptable.
However in our experience of working with young men involved in the criminal justice system, the percentage of those who consciously chose to break the law or harm another is small.
The others fall into two camps. The first are those who see the supply of drugs to the marketplace as a victimless activity and the best means of making a living they have available, as an unskilled young male with no qualifications. The second group are those so lacking in maturity that they end up committing crimes, not through an active, conscious choice but a failure of impulse control in the moment.
It is easy to judge both of those groups and to believe them to be as deserving of punishment. I know I did. Before I had exposure to the reality of the lives they lived, I held strong views, typical of the middle-class culture in which I grew up. I judged drug dealers as preying on the weak in our society and was simply afraid of those who were so volatile and unpredictable. I wanted them taken away.
I am now rather embarrassed to have held those views. Over the past decade working with offenders, I have had a number of realisations. The first is that young men do not fully mature psychologically until they are in their mid-20s – something that can be backed up by research and evidence. I now count myself as fortunate that my middle-class circumstances as a young man meant that my own behaviour through a lack of maturity did not bring me into contact with the criminal justice system.
The second realisation builds on that theme of “there but for the winds of fate go I”. I have heard some truly heart-breaking stories of neglect and abuse. I have worked with young men who have been victims of sexual abuse, who as small children witnessed terrible domestic violence in the home, even watching their mother being raped. I have had to ask myself whether if I’d had similar experiences, I would be where I am today. The answer is a resounding no. Emerging neuroscience supports this conclusion, especially for males.
The tragedy is that putting these vulnerable young men into a toxic prison environment is likely to decrease their chances of building a successful life for themselves. Being exposed to further trauma, living in a dangerous environment (resulting in an almost constantly adrenalised state), where drugs are freely available and where positive role models are in short supply, are possibly the worst conditions in which to try to effect positive change. Is it any surprise that suicides happen so frequently?
Things were bad enough. The advent of “spice” and other synthetic cannabis substances creates a huge additional challenge in the prison environment. An odourless drug that is difficult to detect and can cause psychosis – especially in people who have experienced early-years trauma. Prison staff and others in the system have described it as a game-changer.
We the taxpayers are currently spending around £35,000 per prisoner per year to provide places in these institutions that on almost every level are failing. In 1993, the prison population was 44,000. It’s now 80,000.
The current system needs a radical rethink and a more nuanced approach to understand the reasons for offending and providing a sentence that is appropriate and has a chance of success. Until we start thinking in these terms and talking about “sentencing reform”, rather than simply “prison reform”, we are likely to retain a system that costs huge amounts of money, the lives of vulnerable people and the loss of human potential.
A judge who asked a complainant in a sexual assault trial why she couldn’t just keep her knees together should be removed from the bench, an inquiry tasked with probing the matter has concluded.
In a unanimous recommendation released on Wednesday, the five-person inquiry committee of the Canadian Judicial Council said Robin Camp “committed misconduct” while presiding over a 2014 trial into allegations of sexual assault.
The judge’s conduct, the committee said in its report, “was so manifestly and profoundly destructive of the concept of the impartiality, integrity and independence of the judicial role that public confidence is sufficiently undermined to render the judge incapable of executing the judicial office”.
The Calgary trial made headlines around the world after it emerged that Camp had repeatedly asked the 19-year-old complainant why she hadn’t done more to prevent the alleged rape. “Why couldn’t you just keep your knees together?” Camp asked her. Later he told her that “sex and pain sometimes go together”.
Throughout the trial, Camp erroneously referred to her as “the accused”. At one point he asked the complainant – who said the alleged assault took place on a bathroom sink – why she hadn’t sunk her “bottom down into the basin so he couldn’t penetrate you”.
Camp went on to acquit the man accused in the case. The Alberta court of appeal later ordered a new trial.
In September, an inquiry began looking into whether Camp – a provincial judge who had been recently promoted to the Federal court – should be removed from the bench.
The inquiry heard a remorseful Camp apologise for his remarks. “I was not the good judge I thought I was,” said the 64-year-old. Camp, who was born in South Africa and moved to Calgary in 1998, said he had not understood the changes made to Canadian laws aimed at sheltering sexual assault complainants from discriminatory attitudes.
The inquiry also heard from the female complainant, who said Camp’s remarks had left her grappling with suicidal thoughts. “What did he get from asking that?” she asked. “He made me hate myself and he made me feel like I should have done something … that I was some kind of slut.”
On Wednesday, the inquiry committee said Camp’s questions showed “an antipathy towards laws designed to protect vulnerable witnesses, promote equality and bring integrity to sexual assault trials.” The judge, they added, also relied on “discredited myths and stereotypes about women and victim-blaming during the trial and in his reasons for judgment.”
The recommendation will now be considered by the Canadian Judicial Council. Camp will be invited to make written submissions before the council issues a formal recommendation on his fate to Canada’s justice minister.
A tough alternative to prison, possibly involving “visible” work punishments in the community, should be more readily available to judges, the lord chief justice has suggested.
Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd has called for a debate on how to develop more challenging sentences that would allow offenders to be kept out of jail.
“The most difficult decision a judge ever has to make is whether someone should be sent to prison or not,” the lord chief justice said at his annual press conference in the Royal Courts of Justice on Wednesday. 
“If you are sending someone to prison for a very short time, the ability of the prison to cope with that person is limited in the current circumstances. It’s very important that you have real alternatives to prison. It’s important you have tough community sentences available … and this is something at which we really need to look.
“Should you have some really tough kind of work for [offenders] to do? Should you make the punishment visible? What’s essential is that you have a tough alternative to prison … These are things on which it would be good to have a proper open debate.” 
Fifteen years ago there was a low level of confidence in the probation service, Thomas said. That had now improved but there was still a need for better communication.
“Every judge should go to prison once a year,” Thomas said. “You need to know where you are sending people … The judiciary needs to have confidence and the press needs to see what is being done to rehabilitate or punish people.” 
There are already provisions for offenders carrying out unpaid work such as removing graffiti, clearing wasteland and decorating public places to be required to wear a high-visibility orange vest, however they are not widely used.
In 2008, Labour introduced vests with the words “community payback” written on the back for criminals on community service, a move that attracted controversy and criticism.
Thomas’s comments come as jails in England and Wales endure a turbulent period. This month thousands of prison officers staged a walkout amid claims the system was “in meltdown” after a rise in violence and self-harm. There are more than 85,000 people in prison in England and Wales.
Asked about the large number of prisoners still being held in jail under indefinite sentences for the protection of the public (IPPs) and who have served far longer than their original tariff, Thomas acknowledged that it was “a problem and I’m very glad to see the numbers coming down.”
This month Michael Gove, the former justice secretary, warned that too many people were being sent to prison.
A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “Protecting the public will always be our top priority. Our message is simple: if you commit a serious offence, you should expect to go to prison.
“Sentencing is a matter for independent judges, and the sentencing council recently published new guidelines to make sure sentences accurately reflect the seriousness of the crime.”
Last year 8,600 probation staff were outsourced as part of the privatisation of more than half of the probation service in England and Wales.
In 2014, seven-year-long contracts for rehabilitation services worth £3.7bn were awarded to companies such as Staffline, Sodexo and MTCnovo to supervise low and medium-risk offenders. Those who are deemed high-risk are still supervised by the National Probation Service.
If you work in probation services we’d like to hear from you. What do you think of their current state, and how have you been affected?
You can share your experiences with us by filling in the form below - anonymously if you wish. All information will be kept confidential and we will feature some of the submissions in our coverage.
Theresa May should unilaterally pass legislation to secure the rights of up to 3 million European Union citizens to stay in Britain or risk souring the tone of the Brexit talks, according to Labour’s Keir Starmer.
The shadow Brexit secretary said May should act immediately and abandon her increasingly controversial position of refusing to make any concession over the rights of EU citizens in the UK without securing equivalent guarantees for the 1.2 million UK citizens living elsewhere in the EU.
“It’s becoming increasingly apparent to me from my discussions in Brussels with those that are likely to be involved in the negotiations that they are very concerned about the fact that we are not giving comfort and status to their citizens,” he told the Guardian.
“They have said to me, pretty well in terms, the UK should sort this out before March, and that would ensure that the article 50 negotiations got off to a much better start than they will otherwise do.”
Relations between the UK and the rest of the EU have become increasingly heated on the topic. On Tuesday the European council president, Donald Tusk, published a strongly worded letter to a group of Conservative MPs saying the issue would have to wait for formal negotiations to begin and appeared to blame the British electorate for causing the uncertainty in the first place.
Starmer described Tusk’s letter as unhelpful, but said it “points to the need to act unilaterally now, and is further evidence of the unhelpful atmosphere that has been created in the lead-up to the negotiations”.
In his letter Tusk added: “The only way to dispel the fears and doubts of all citizens concerned is the quickest possible start of the negotiations based on article 50 of the treaty.”
But Starmer, the MP for Holborn and St Pancras in London, said the government should take more urgent action as a goodwill gesture before formal talks begin. “Everywhere you go there is a mounting sense of very real injustice. I think everybody feels it; it’s across parties, and it can’t be left unresolved any longer.”
At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, May defended her approach. She said: “I think the reaction that we have seen shows it was absolutely right for us not to do what the Labour party wanted us to do, which was simply to give away the guarantee for rights of EU citizens here in the UK. As we have seen, that would have left UK citizens in Europe high and dry.”
The government has suggested the vast majority of those EU citizens already living in the UK are likely to be entitled to apply for permanent residence, because they have been here for more than five years. But Starmer said that could be a bureaucratic and unwieldy process and could overwhelm the resources of the Home Office. He added that “permanent residence” was an EU concept, which would be expected to fall away when Britain leaves.
Instead, he suggested the government could “pass a domestic law, dealing with the status of these individuals, and it would get cross-party support, and could be passed very swiftly”.
He added: “At the very least there ought to be clarity for those who were already here on 23 June.”
The bad blood between London and Brussels over the future of EU citizens was indicative of a wider problem with the tone the government had adopted as it approached the coming negotiations, Starmer claimed, warning about “mixed messages” from London.
He contrasted May’s Conservative party conference speech, widely interpreted as signalling she favoured hard Brexit, with reassurances subsequently given to Nissan about continued access to the single market.
“It’s very difficult to suggest that what [May] said at conference and the Nissan assurance are the same thing, and so mixed messages are being received in Brussels. That is not healthy.”
He added that the sometimes jocular tone of the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, risked offending his EU counterparts. “They perceive an arrogance on behalf of the UK, and Boris Johnson may think he’s very amusing in his approach, but my perception is our EU partners are not in the mood for that kind of amusement.” He added: “We need to make sure that the tone is right.”
With just four months to go until May’s self-imposed end-of-March deadline for triggering article 50, Starmer said he believed there was still a tussle within the government about what kind of relationship with the EU it wanted to aim at when negotiations began.
“I think they haven’t come to a final view, and that is because the argument about Europe that has been going on for years in the Tory party has broken out like never before,” he said. “It’s become an argument about the very future of our country.”
Labour’s own stance on Brexit has sometimes appeared less than unanimous, and senior party figures have told the Guardian that Starmer himself – one of the highest profile promotions when Jeremy Corbyn refilled his frontbench after the summer leadership challenge – is being “man marked”.
He underlined Corbyn’s insistence that the party would not seek to block the triggering of article 50 – but did not rule out amending any legislation the government brings to parliament, to force May to reveal more about her negotiating stance.
“We won’t frustrate the process, but we do want to put some grip and grit into the process, to ensure that parliament and the public know the prime minister’s starting position,” he said. Asked if that could mean Labour tabling amendments to any bill, he said: “So long as it doesn’t frustrate the process, then it is important to look at options.”
Asked whether Brexit presented “enormous opportunities”, as the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, recently said, Starmer replied: “I think there are huge risks in Brexit; and I see the task of the Labour party as being to ensure that we get the best possible outcome that works for everybody in the UK.”
He also struck a somewhat different tone from the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, on how Labour should tackle voters’ concerns about immigration.