cused of “calling her family racist” after things turned quite nasty in the days following the result, Brexit has acted as a catalyst. “My family have always been racist, sexist and homophobic, and the referendum result has just shined a massive spotlight on their behaviour. [It gave them] a green light to be overtly racist rather than keeping it behind closed doors.”
And so, she has made the difficult decision to let go of some family members. “I am afraid, like many, I’m guilty of little more than eye-rolling when someone makes a racial slur and it has really made me realise I can’t do that. I have to challenge it,” she says. “It feels wrong to say it, but I feel relief mostly. There is no sadness there and I’ve certainly not removed people just because they voted leave … The referendum just gave me the kick up the backside to deal with something I should have years ago.”
• All pseudonyms from the original article have been retained.
The battle for pop culture’s top spot was so convoluted and fiercely fought this year, and with so many intertwining cross-textual sub-plots, that it made Games of Thrones look like a game of KerPlunk.
In June, we witnessed the celebrity world’s Red Wedding. This involved a series of connected spats involving Taylor Swift and Kanye West (the former objecting to her inclusion in the latter’s song, Famous), Kim Kardashian (who provided the smoking gun: footage of Swift giving her inclusion the thumbs up) and a supporting cast featuring Swift’s former boyfriend Calvin Harris and Katy Perry, who chipped in with some helpful bon mots of her own. Somewhere in all this was Tom Hiddleston, whose relationship with Swift seemed so contrived that many fans assumed it was part of a staged, conceptual art piece on the nature of modern fame.
This battle took place on social media between practitioners of old-fashioned fame, such as Swift, and the modern type of fame, such as Kardashian, posing questions about the myriad ways it is possible to become famous at a time when traditional household names can carry less digital relevance – and less earning power – than Instagram-famous teens.
By the end of the year, West had been hospitalised and the Kardashians were keeping a low profile after Kim was mugged in Paris. Perry loudly endorsed Hillary Clinton while Swift’s silence on the matter was seen as tacit endorsement of Trump. Hiddleswift ended, and Calvin Harris released a song about working in M&S. The rest of us, meanwhile, were left to ponder the shifting rules of life in the public eye.
It was once the case that celebrities relied on press, TV and radio to spread their message, but Instagram, Twitter and Snapchat now mean famous people have a direct line of communication with fans. “For stars constantly in the press, social media has made image maintenance easier for the PR and manager,” explains a senior publicist with vast experience of high-level celebrities. Let’s call him Publicist M. “We’re able to present the narrative we want to tell – we can do that instantly and adapt it when needed.”
In a world where celebrities control their own narratives, But some celebrities are simply better digital storytellers than others. “It’s important to be transparent in your words,” suggests Andy Beal, an online reputation consultant. “That doesn’t mean you can’t be selective with what you share – the danger is when you manipulate or embellish the truth.”
It may well be easier than ever to tell your own story, but it’s also easier than ever for others to give their own side of the argument. “Disaster strikes when the star is rattling around in a multi-million dollar pad with too many rooms and too much time,” Publicist M says. “They spend hours scrolling down their phone, getting worked up and going off-message with foolish posts. That’s when I get the call and have to drop everything to fix a problem that wasn’t there to begin with. We’ve used excuses ranging from ‘it was a joke’ to ‘the phone was hacked’.” Sometimes, he adds, it’s necessary to suck it up and suffer 24 hours’ embarrassment.
“That rule was always there, and in the old days it was easy,” says Dean Piper, the former Sunday Mirror showbiz columnist. “These days you can’t really get away with doing anything in public, which sometimes makes me wonder if people want those things to come out.”
It was Piper’s frustration with “social fucking media” that prompted a recent move into PR. “Showbiz journalism in 2016,” he points out, “is just writing up what has happened on social media, 12 hours after it happened.”
Perhaps this hints at another way celebrities can control the media narrative: if reporters are kept busy embedding tweets in 20 news posts a day, they’re not out and about looking for other stories.
It is a theory backed up by Publicist M: “Whenever A-listers get together it’s always assumed it’s a set up,” he says. “But the reality is it’s easier for stars to date within their own circle. If anything, many hookups never get reported at all – they take place behind closed doors in a complicated maze of hotel service elevators and exiting through restaurant kitchens. Most stars simply don’t want their personal lives splashed over the press.”
In bygone times (which is to say before about 2006), famous people would justifiably complain when the media didn’t tell the truth, but now that they develop their own narratives, they realise how useful it can be to blur the lines between fact and fiction.
For some stars, the question isn’t how true or false something might be – it’s how much attention it might get online. Fans can be complicit, approaching the world of celebrity in the same way one might engage with WWE: you suspect that some of what you’re seeing is faked, but you reach for the popcorn anyway. Was it any wonder we thought Swift and Hiddleston’s relationship was either fake or a conceptual art piece designed to trap the media?
“Authenticity, like spontaneity, can be carefully choreographed,” says Benjamin Cook, who created the Becoming YouTube documentary series in 2012. He tells the story of finding himself at a big YouTube event in Florida and, afterwards, sitting in a car with three big-name YouTubers. “They’d just taken a selfie in the back seat and one of them was about to post it. They were debating – for five whole minutes, with no hint of irony – how to word the tweet to make it more ‘relatable’. It had to be relatable.”
Fast-forward to summer 2016, and Cook was watching Adele at Glastonbury. “She kept reminding us how the night before she had been on the sofa with a Chinese takeaway, then she did the washing-up and took the bins out. I was thinking: you’re Adele! You don’t have to try so hard to seem relatable. I don’t need to know that you do your own laundry in order to love you.”
Organisations such as press-governing body Ipso are there to ensure that mistakes, genuine or deliberate, are corrected with an apology. Right? “Even when I have evidence proving a story to be incorrect, an apology never happens,” says Publicist M. “It’s always the same conversation: without making it explicit, it is implied the publication will go to war on my client and run a series of stories that will destroy them.”
How about super-injunctions, though? If you know a story’s about to come out, can you squash it? “Super-injunctions are a lengthy, expensive waste of time in which lawyers make enough money to buy a house in the Cotswolds, and that’s about it,” Publicist M says. “I always advise against them and instead suggest we start a dialogue to remove some sections of the story. It works with tabloids as long as it involves a major star, as the tabloid knows they’ll need the star in future to sell papers.”
Beyond modern celebrity’s tentpole characters there’s a huge selection of names who spring from shows such as Geordie Shore, Ex on the Beach, Celebrity Big Brother and Celebrity Dinner Date. One man who has done them all is Durham-born Ricci Guarnaccio. “I’ve done so many reality TV shows, but it’s not about the fame,” is his surprisingly noble take on things. Then he adds: “It’s about the money.”
“Our main source of income is a lump sum when you do the show, or personal appearances,” he continues. “But you’re always looking for the next thing because if you’ve been off TV for a long period of time, it’s harder to get work.” Asked for clarification, he says “a long period of time” is about six months.
If you want Guarnaccio at your nightclub for a couple of hours, you can expect to pay him between £1,000 and £2,500, then there are paid social posts for “things like fake tans”, which also keep money coming in. “I didn’t even have Facebook when I went on Geordie Shore, now there are so many networks to keep on top of to stay relevant,” he says. “Two days ago, I had a conference call with my manager to discuss which pictures to put up, when, and which frames to use. You’ve got to tweet at peak times.”
It’s not exactly a hand-to-mouth existence but, whereas Kanye West will never not be famous, people such as Guarnaccio and his Geordie Shore pals know they’re perilously close to the celebrity/civilian borderline. Guarnaccio accepts that if it does all go wrong, he can at least fall back on his former profession as a fully trained hairdresser. “I’ve seen a few good friends who’ve come across badly on TV, it hasn’t worked out, they’re skint and they’re still chasing fame,” he warns.
“They don’t want to bite the bullet and go back to normal jobs, because they still see themselves as a celebrity.”
A decade ago, Katie Price defined this brand of fiercely competitive career celebrity with a string of autobiographies, novels, horse garments, TV shows and clothes. “Even she’s having to really think about where her career’s going,” notes Piper. “And if people like Katie Price can’t carry on the drama, you’re running out of ideas.”
Piper’s advice is blunt. “The days are numbered for celebrities bringing in thousands of pounds by being fundamentally untalented,” he warns. “If you’re that sort of celebrity, you’re basically fucked. Get a proper job and use your brain.”
But there’s no shortage of cash being hurled at aspirational teens and influencers on YouTube, Instagram and Snapchat. These are characters thriving under the radar, and beyond the reach of traditional celebrity outlets.
Cook suggests that it is missing the point to ask why the likes of Zoella haven’t crossed over into presenting roles on shows such as, for instance, Xtra Factor. “They just don’t want to. Seriously, why would you? Zoella doesn’t need TV. Her videos get 20m, 25m views per month – and she makes them herself, at home. Most YouTubers who are even half as successful as Zoella will have more creative freedom – and be earning more money – on YouTube.”
“I’m, like, this close to overexposure,” was one of the more self-aware statements Swift made in her leaked conversation with West. Our Geordie Shore friend Guarnaccio may well be right that his peers have a six-month window to top up their fame or risk being forgotten but, for the world’s biggest stars, it is OK to disappear for a year. After all: how can you stage a comeback if you’ve never gone away?
Publicist M agrees, outlining a six-point career resuscitation timeline for Swift: “She should retire the ridiculous squad, take the paps off the pay roll, fire the team and disappear to her Rhode Island mansion for a year to grow up and realise she is not, and has never been, a victim. Then she should come back with a killer album that makes no reference to this past year.” Sensible advice.
Gritstone edges and limestone outcrops loom over this village in the Peak District national park and if you’re too full of festive feasting to haul yourself up to those heights, you can amble along the Derwent river, which flows past this 18th-century cottage. Or you could hike in your mind’s eye from your bed, which overlooks woods and moorland. There are only two bedrooms, although you could redivide the large master chamber. It sits in half an acre of waterside gardens. Offers in the region of £525,000. Onthemarket.com , 01433 328987
Newly arrived in England after eight years in the south-west of Ireland, we dumped our stuff in Kennington, south London, and went to my then husband’s parents’ house for Christmas. It was the late 80s, and our marriage was heading for the rocks.
There’d been some idea that a complete change would do us good, though quite how the flat in Kennington was supposed to energise us I have no idea. It was bleak and damp, three flights up on an estate with stinky stairwells and rubbish overflowing in the yards. Still, it was a change from cabin fever. I was looking forward to furnishing it with my books, which had been stored in a large wardrobe at my parents-in-law’s all the time we’d been away.
I never wanted to leave them there, but was persuaded. The argument ran: we are going to live in a cowshed, a tent and a derelict cottage for the foreseeable future. It will be damp. You don’t want your books getting ruined by damp. Let’s store them with my folks and bring them over later. So we did. And over the years a few found their way over, in dribs and drabs. But every time I insisted on getting the lot, there was some reason or other why I couldn’t.
Oh, they’re fine. My folks don’t mind – they’ve got loads of room.
There’s not enough space in the car.
His mum said she thought they were in the shed. I found a cardboard box among the gardening tools and odds and ends, the kind a printer might come in. Unless it had Tardis-like qualities, my books could not be there. But there they were, a dreggy miscellany not even filling the box.
He was in the kitchen. “My books are gone,” I said. And he came to look.
I don’t remember the conversation in the shed. I remember the picture in my head of my books as they once were, covering a whole wall; and the increasing panic – mine that they were gone, his that I might upset his parents.
He loved his mum and dad. He’d put them through some worries in his time and was now very protective of their feelings.
“It’s OK,” he said, “they probably just forgot where they put them. We’ll get Christmas over then I’ll sort it out.” Could I ruin this family Christmas? Everyone stuffed to bursting, his sister, her boyfriend, her two copper-haired toddlers bouncing about the room to the delight of their besotted grandparents; the tree, the decorations, the old film on the telly, the blazing fire, the discarded wrapping paper. His parents had bought me some furry gloves. When I asked about my books, everything was vague. They’d been moving stuff around. The loft maybe? Where are the ladders?
Not now, not now.
I found out two days later that they’d given my books to a Boys’ Brigade jumble sale. I saw my books thrown in boxes, spread out on a table, in piles on the floor, people poking through them, buying my ancient Come Hither for 50p, my dad’s Lovecrafts for 10p each. I lost the books of my childhood and my lifetime.
The books of my dead father with his signature and the date in faded ink on the flyleaves. His old art books, the big hessian-backed 101 Details From The National Gallery; I copied the pictures out of it learning to draw. I lost the lovely big Dover paperbacks; the Ancient Mariner illustrated by Gustave Doré; my Louis Untermeyer poetry book with the pictures coloured in; a tiny handwritten Song of the Morrow; Ulysses with a bow on the spine; Great Fairy Tales, a galleon embossed on the cover; and my old Bob Dylan catalogue from the “Judas” concert, 1966, at Manchester’s Free Trade Hall. I lost the Moomins and Borrowers and Narnias and Patricia Lynchs (which you couldn’t get hold of any more), all the old Ruperts, and Orlando the Marmalade Cat.
Tip of the iceberg. They were only books. He talked about temporality and the virtue of valuing people more than things. They were nice people, his mum and dad, good people. Anything they’d done had been innocently done. They must not be disturbed. They just had no idea that books could matter. No blame, as it says in my old I Ching, the one that vanished with all the rest.
What hurt was his anger at my “over-reaction”, how paltry he considered the loss. Only books. But everything I lost at that time – Ireland, my marriage, old friends, my mother – was summed up in those books.
It took a while to see my part. The books were mine – I should have taken control, but I had let them drift. Things had to change. It was the end of drifting and the beginning of a different life.
A bit of sparkle … a jazzy top … here are some sartorial plans for 25 December
On her way to hospice my patient had one last thing to take care of. She has had a difficult time for the past several years culminating in such an aggressive and visually distressing recurrence that even she says she had had enough and just wants to die. She remains at home for as long as she can, receiving visitors and cherishing her grandchildren, until it’s just too hard. Then, graciously and calmly, she submits to hospice, and along with it, the truth that these are the very final days of her life.
Sometimes, she reminds me of the feted neurologist, Oliver Sacks, and the grace with which he faced the end of his life – except she would laugh at the comparison, calling herself an ordinary woman who had worked hard, reared two wonderful children, and just as she felt she had acquitted her roles, lost the lottery to cancer.
The last time we met, she was breathless, uncomfortable and fatigued. But her face shone with a rare dignity. She told me that while she wasn’t afraid to die, she grieved for her son who was disabled and depended on her for care. I understood immediately that her greatest worry was his welfare upon her impending death. Her daughter sat next to her, outwardly calm, but her expression reflecting private horror at the prospect of losing her mother and becoming the sole guardian of her brother, while fulfilling the usual responsibilities of work and motherhood. Even in a clinic where sadness reigns, their story moved me greatly and I wanted desperately to help.
“I feel as if there’s nothing I can do for you personally but I’m going to see about your son,” I said, unable to keep the defeat from my voice. I promised nothing and she expected nothing but by luck, a phone call explaining the urgency and pathos of the situation helped decisions that would have happened anyway. But it meant that in the final days of her life, a mother knew that her child would be safe.
“Fragile”, declares the sign on the box resting on the floor as I enter my office. Curiosity takes second place as I gently move it out of the way so it’s not a tripping hazard. The intervening hours are taken up by ill patients and it’s not until a receptionist reminds me that I think to open it.
Behind layers of beautiful wrapping there lies an exquisite edible tree. Luscious strawberries hang on branches, coated in delectable chocolate. A star-shaped piece of pineapple sits atop the tree. I stand still, catching my breath at the work of art. A small card nestles at the base of the tree. I detach it, careful not to disturb the branches of the tree. The card reads simply, “Thank you for looking after our son and brother.” My throat catches. Having underestimated her panic, I had clearly also underestimated her subsequent relief.
I call her at the hospice. The nurse, initially sceptical, puts me through. She speaks slowly, breathlessly but that she is thrilled at my pleasure is apparent. I don’t know how to say that I am particularly moved to be in her thoughts at the end of her life, when typically, the oncologist is thought to have failed, but she fills in the silence with a firm instruction: “Listen, take this gift home. I want your children to know what you do and just how much you are appreciated.”
Upon hearing this, I am suffused by a type of survivor’s guilt. All this for doing my job? For moving a small piece of a giant puzzle? I can’t even say I will see her next week or next month. Instead, I reassure her that she is in good hands. And I drive home slowly, taking care to not topple my gift.
The philosopher Seneca remarked, “What need is there to weep over parts of life? The whole of it calls for tears.” A career in medicine can feel like that, amid the pressures and politics. Each day is a scramble – the healthiest patients protest; the sickest suffer quietly; the neediest don’t even recognise their need.
The funding is never sufficient and the bureaucracy is never efficient. Just like in other aspects of modern life, it has become customary to be at the mercy of the cynical message that says medicine has become entirely transactional, that doctors don’t care for patients like they used to and patients don’t respect doctors like they used to. But just as this cynicism threatens to vanquish you, you realise that the beauty and wonder of the doctor-patient relationship is actually alive and well, manifest in the most unexpected encounters.
It’s fairly common to hear stories of doctors who go beyond the call of duty to help their patients but if I have learnt anything from being a doctor, it’s the way in which patients impel doctors to realise the better angels of our nature.
If I were to name one attribute that trumps fear in a cancer clinic, it’s generosity. Just as you thought there couldn’t possibly be room in a patient’s heart for anything other than the most urgent of needs, there arrives a card in the mail, the photo of a longed-for baby, a letter of appreciation, or sometimes an edible tree that says thank you for looking after me, thank you for accompanying me on my journey of terror, thank you for being you.
Mostly you’re floored, knowing full well that much of a patient’s outcome, excellent or awful, depends on biology, environment and a whole lot of factors beyond the control of your prescribing finger, but you can’t help admiring the character of people who, even when they are dying, spare a thought for someone else. It’s not that these acknowledgements make us feel more important than that they remind us of universal experiences and shared humanity. They speak to us of empathy, compassion, and humility, not as the exclusive domain of the doctor but indeed, flowing in equal measure towards the doctor.
My edible tree comes home and is greeted with gasps of wonder and squeals of delight that must surely be audible to my patient. Read the card at least, I say, but my children are too busy. The strawberries are picked and the chocolate licked. The pineapple star is evenly divided. For a long while there is only the sound of contentment until someone finally says, “It must be hard work to earn these chocolates, well done!”
I think to myself that somewhere in her sleep my patient must be smiling, knowing that her wish had been fulfilled.
The first 10 minutes of being stuck in the tunnel are fine – I mean they’re not great, but there’s air conditioning and there are lights and there’s the sense that whatever the problem is, it will be fixed soon and we’ll be on our way.
We’re all on our phones, saying we’ll be a little late.
In my carriage are north shore types, mostly middle aged in suits and summer shift dresses, briefcases, shopping bags with Christmas presents across the seats, heading home in the heat.
I am rushing to a meeting – I need to be there for my friend to have a quorum. She is starting an NGO and its constitution stipulates five people need to attend a meeting.
The worst is that it’s Wynyard tunnel. Eugh, Wynyard, the ugliest station in Sydney. No charm, weird layout, a bad vibe attached to it, a smell like salami left in the sun.
Even its name – Wynyard – is crap.
Of course I would be stuck at Wynyard.
At the start we are given updates every few minutes.
“We’re going slowly because of power supply issues.”
“We’ve stopped because a train in front of us has broken down at Wynyard.”
“We expect delays of no more than 10 minutes.”
And on it goes.
The voice sounds Anglo-Pakistani and young. We collectively identify him as on our side and as clueless as we are – he’s our hapless saviour. Later he makes a weak joke, and we laugh even when there is not much air.
About half an hour in, there is another voice. It’s mostly indecipherable, and prefaced with a loud unpleasant noise like a fax machine dialling numbers then an older voice (who is this – someone higher up in CityRail? Speaking from a control tower? Someone who has access to air?) He’s using words like “pentanenhubble” and “grid appterns”. What is this – rail talk? Then the lights flicker off in a way that can only be described as sinister and the air is cut and we know we’re in for a longer haul.
A woman behind me is having a panic attack – but it’s a quiet one. Its like she thinks she’s going to die but doesn’t want to much bother anyone about it.
She’s as sweaty and waxy-complexioned as the rest of us, but her eyes are wide and frozen and her fingers are on her wrists as if she is taking her own pulse.
In the seats around her are two men and a woman – older – who have something in their countenance of figures from a Rembrandt painting, specifically The Anatomy Lesson of Dr Nicolaes Tulp.
They are leaning in but not too close and they are talking to her in a particular way – bland, soothing, constant: “Take a breathe and you’ll adjust. It’s OK, just a little stuffy. There’s plenty of air, you will be able to breathe – all right?”
After an hour the air has become very thin and stale. It’s the gruel of air. People were joking and talking and laughing before but the carriage is quiet – no jokes now, nor people making calls. It’s as if we want to save the air, and to talk is to waste it. There is, however, the strange strobe-lighting effect of flash photography. As we are told to move towards the front of the train, most people in the carriage are taking photos of the crush of passengers and weird, grim selfies – their shirt wet with sweat against the backdrop of the CityRail electric blue upholstery.
An earlier announcement had told us to get ready to walk along the tracks – they actually used the term “detrain” (or though perhaps “derail” would be a better expression). Most of us are crammed at the front of the carriage, ready to walk. But the latest round of messages is that they are going to do a “reset” of the train – like it is a broken laptop and they just need to turn the power off and on.
I tweet about being stuck in the train. Channels Nine and Seven want me to shoot video footage.
I get contacted from someone who wants me to be on breakfast radio. But the most exciting thing is connecting with a stranger – also on Twitter – who is in the carriage ahead of me.
“Do you have any water?” I ask him.
He doesn’t but tells me: “Couple of babies in my carriage; one man fanning a stranger’s baby to keep it cool and another offering his apple!”
And: “Passengers in my carriage using intercom to request guard open doors for air. Request denied for fear passengers will leave train.”
Then right on cue – an announcement: “Do not force the doors open and walk on to the tracks.”
OMG – who would do that?
Maybe someone who thinks they are going to die. Maybe someone who is having a panic attack. Maybe someone who feels as if the carriage is running out of air.
There is contagion in panic. I feel a surge of it myself.
There is announcement to the effect of “could all babies come to the front of the train”.
I imagine all the babies jumping out of their hot prams, bidding their parents farewell and walking to the front of the train: “So long suckers, we’re out of here.”
People with bikes are to leave them on the train.
People in wheelchairs are to stay on the train.
Yet still no movement. I fantasise about breaking a window. I don’t want escape, yet I long for a cool breeze, some movement in the air.
Passengers around me are discussing whether or not to break out and walk along the tracks. A man behind me is telling a fellow passenger, “I don’t have anyone waiting for me at home, not even a pet.”
After 90 minutes the Anglo-Pakistani voice surfaces again. When he says, “Finally – I think we might be on our way”, we clap him.
Then we are told we can leave the carriage and walk along the tracks.
My trio of Nicolaes Tulps are still low-talking to the panicked passenger, but she is up, standing and ready to roll.
We exit down a ladder and a ramp and on to the pitch-black tracks with lights here and there. I look out for rats and feel obscurely disappointed when I see none.
The man in front of me touches one of the lights as we pass, as if to gauge what it’s made of. Maybe he’s always wanted to walk the tunnels. We walk up a ramp, on to another train, the one that’s stuck – and walk through that then on to a platform where someone gives us bottles of warm water. And then we “tap off” – that will be $3.38 thanks – and ascend from Wynyard up to George Street. I gulp the air. 
After such an ordeal I get home to a note a neighbour has left me under the door.
“I personally in my 30+ years in this unit, never hung my private wears in the public line … it is very unpleasant to have the private undies of other people’s where I can’t avoid it.”
Only a week ago I had written a column about breakfast host Sam Armytage being underpants shamed, and now I was being shamed for my undies hanging on the clothes line.
Is this a thing? Is it really considered bad form to hang your underwear on a communal clothesline? It’s just material, drying in the sun.
Popular brands of crumpets contain “alarmingly high” amounts of salt, with one “giant” version having an amount equivalent to that of more than three bags of ready salted crisps, a survey has found.
Warburtons’ Giant Crumpets contain twice the concentration of salt per 100g than a Waitrose own-brand version, showing that the content can easily be reduced by manufacturers, Consensus Action on Salt and Health (Cash) said.
Almost half (48%) of the 27 crumpets included in the survey exceeded the government’s responsibility deal 2017 average salt targets for crumpets of 1.13g of salt per 100g, while seven products exceeded the maximum salt target of 1.25g salt per 100g.
The target for crumpets is the same as for sausages, meaning many brands are saltier than sausages by concentration, Cash said.
The average salt level per crumpet was 0.62g, which is nearly the same amount as found in one and a half packets of ready salted crisps.
Its survey found the Warburtons range of crumpets were the worst offenders, with the giant range containing 1.48g of salt per 100g, or 1.55g per crumpet – more than a quarter of the recommended daily maximum of salt for adults, without any topping.
Overall, salt levels in branded crumpets were significantly higher on average than supermarket own-label versions, with gluten-free alternatives being saltier than normal crumpets.
Waitrose Deep and Delicious Buttermilk crumpets and Essential Waitrose crumpets contained half the amount of salt per 100g as the Warburtons crumpets.
Cash’s nutritionist and campaign director, Katharine Jenner, said: “Salt reduction has been recognised as a public health priority for a number of years, so responsible manufacturers know they should be reducing salt in their foods.
“It’s shocking that certain brands of crumpets still contain more salt than three bags of ready salted crisps. It’s imperative that retailers, food manufacturers and the out-of-home catering sector work much harder to help us achieve the public health goal of consuming no more than 6g salt per person per day.”
Cash’s chairman, Graham MacGregor, a professor of cardiovascular medicine at Queen Mary University of London, said: “Reducing salt is the most cost-effective measure to lower blood pressure and reduce the number of people suffering from strokes and heart disease, one of the commonest causes of death in the UK.
“Salt reduction targets have been set for manufacturers to reach before the end of 2017, and if some companies, for example Warburtons, don’t achieve them, we must regulate the targets to ensure a level playing field, as requested by many of the supermarkets and British Retail Consortium.”
Warburtons said it had invested significantly in technology and innovation to reduce salt levels by 25% in recent years. A spokeswoman said: “We continue to look for opportunities to further reduce the overall levels of salt across our range by using baking powder alternatives, such as potassium bicarbonate, which has yet to be approved by government.
“Consumers can find all nutritional information on pack and we are signed up to the government’s voluntary traffic light labelling scheme, for which all of our crumpets are rated amber.” 
Dr Alison Tedstone, chief nutritionist at Public Health England, said: “The amount of salt we consume is slowly going down, but we are still eating too much, leaving many of us at risk of high blood pressure and the chance of having a heart attack or stroke. 
“Tackling the amount of salt people consume cannot be left to the individual alone. The food industry has made good progress, with reductions of up to 50% in some everyday foods. More still needs to be done and we encourage all sectors – including the eating out of home sector – to continue working towards achieving the 2017 salt targets.”
Crumpets with the highest amount of salt per 100g, according to the Cash findings, include:
A short stroll on Christmas Day is the antidote for many a gluttonous festive feast. But according to health experts, a post-dinner walk would have to last four and a half hours to work off the calories of a typical Christmas dinner with all the trimmings.
Figures released by the Royal Society for Public Health (RSPH) on Wednesday reveal that the average person will consume about 6,000 calories on Christmas Day alone, nearly three times the recommended daily intake for women and more than twice the recommended amount for men.
According to researchers, one mince pie would take 37 minutes of frenetic ice-skating to work off the calories, while a large glass of mulled wine would take about 44 minutes to walk off.
As those tasked with cooking Christmas dinner buy their ingredients this week, research shows that where you buy each component could also significantly affect your calorie intake.
The Guardian looked at eight big supermarkets and compared the fat, sugar and calorie content of key ingredients in a typical Christmas dinner, using the supermarket’s own luxury brand.
While turkey is a lean white meat – notoriously easy to dry out if left a little long in the oven – there was more than four times as much fat in a Marks & Spencer’s bird than one from Lidl, which also had the fewest calories.
The most calorific cranberry sauce from the supermarkets surveyed was Aldi’s Scandi-inspired lingonberry and cranberry sauce, 60% of which was sugars, compared with only 18.5% of M&S’s cranberry sauce.
Aldi shoppers are the least likely to feel out of pocket when they get to the checkout, after it was found to have the cheapest festive meal in the annual Good Housekeeping magazine festive shopping basket cost survey. It found that all the ingredients for Christmas dinner for eight cost just £22.03. Lidl came in at second place (£24.57), while Iceland came third. The most expensive basket was from Marks & Spencer (£49.40) followed by Waitrose (£40.02).
But those looking to get as much fat for their money as possible might want to get stuck into those cosy pigs in blankets. If bought from Tesco they will contain 325 calories per 100g, or 58 calories per little pig. The lowest calorie version could be found in M&S, where there was still nearly 22g of fat per 100g of the things.
We consume plenty of vegetables on Christmas Day, even if younger – and sometimes older – family members will employ ingenious tricks to hide overcooked sprouts. However, ready-to-roast frozen potatoes and parsnips tend to contain more calories than fresh items.
Aldi’s frozen roast potatoes (cooked, of course, in goose fat) contain 201 calories per 100g, with 9.3g of fat, while the healthiest are from Sainsbury’s, at 117 calories per 100g. Aldi’s Four Seasons parsnips with a honey glaze are also the most calorie-laden of the bunch, with 253 calories per 100g, while there are only 118 calories in Morrison’s own-brand version.
Among Christmas puddings, Aldi’s version has the most calories, at 347 per 100g, while Tesco’s version has the most sugar (44g) and Marks & Spencer’s the most fat.
Lidl’s own-brand Snowy Lodge mince pies sold out in many parts of the UK last year after coming second in a Which? taste test, but each little pie contains 257 calories, including 9.4g of fat.
According to RSPH, when we put all of that together we are likely to consume 1,450 calories during Christmas dinner, and then another 820 if we have space for Christmas pudding with cream. That’s about seven hours of walking, if you wanted to work off the lot in one day, according to Shirley Cramer, chief executive of the RSPH. “Trying not to over-indulge too much and keeping active over the holidays might help a little when it comes to avoiding a nasty shock on the scales and a lot of hard work in the new year,” she said.
Dr Frankie Phillips, dietitian and British Dietetic Association spokesperson, said there was another way. “Christmas dinner has a bad reputation, but it can actually be a very healthy meal,” she said. “It could be the one time of year where people actually pile up a lot of vegetables of their plate.”
Brussels sprouts contain folate, potassium, fibre and vitamin C, parsnips provide fibre and folate, while cabbage also has folate as well as calcium, iron, fibre and vitamin C.
To make Christmas dinner just that touch healthier, Phillips recommends not overcooking the vegetables, and using the cooking water to help make gravy so that no nutrients are lost. And, quite simply, not eating until you are fit to burst.
“Stopping eating when you feel satisfied is the way to go; no one feels great if they have overeaten,” she said. “And just try and bear in mind how much you are eating – and drinking during the day. If you are going to have a mince pie, try to just have one.”
Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls cost £1.03 per minute from a BT landline. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
From books and beauty products to beer and bird food, these gifts keep on giving long after Father Christmas has returned home
Indigenous chef Mark Olive, aka The Black Olive, makes Christmas lunch with Australia’s native ingredients such as wattle seeds and warrigal greens, and eggnog using an emu egg. ‘Indigenous herbs are an exciting thing, we should be using more of them,’ he says in this special Guardian film. ‘Australia has an opportunity to invent its own cuisine. We have this amazing cuisine here that we don’t use. We’ve embraced every other culture in this country except what we’ve got in our own backyard … get out there, explore these flavours, smell them and try them’
Cream 150g caster sugar and the egg yolk, slowly adding the sugar while whisking. Heat the milk over a water bath, adding creamed egg and sugar slowly as it thickens and coats the back of a spoon. Chill for an hour in the fridge or sit over an ice bath to cool down. Add the vanilla essence. Beat the cream until it peaks, and set aside. Whisk the egg whites slowly, incorporating the remaining sugar until it peaks. Add the brandy. Fold in the egg whites and the whipped cream.
Served chilled or warm in a tall glass with grated nutmeg.
100g of warrigal greens or silverbeet
1 loaf light rye bread
1g native thyme or thyme
2g native pepper or black pepper
2g salt bush or pink salt
3 sticks celery, diced
2 medium brown onions, diced
6 leaves of fresh sage, chopped
50g butter
10 whole eggs
2g sea parsley or parsley
Blanch off warrigal greens, rinse under cold water and squeeze out excess moisture. Set aside to dry while you prepare the rest of the mixture. De-crust the bread and cut into small diced pieces and place in a bowl. Add the remaining dry ingredients as well as the chopped warrigal greens and mix through the bread. (The greens may also be chopped and sprinkled on top at the end to give the stuffing a vibrant lift in colour.) Fry off the celery and onions and sage in the butter and stir until soft. Stir through bread mixture. Whisk the eggs and then combine through the stuffing mixture until moist. Add milk if it feels too dry – it should just come together and not be slushy.
Turn out into a baking tray and cook in preheated oven at 160C until firm and browned. Check after 20 minutes. Turn out and cut into appropriate slices.
Now that a reality TV star is preparing to become president of the United States, can we agree that celebrity culture is more than just harmless fun – that it might, in fact, be an essential component of the systems that govern our lives?
The rise of celebrity culture did not happen by itself. It has long been cultivated by advertisers, marketers and the media. And it has a function. The more distant and impersonal corporations become, the more they rely on other people’s faces to connect them to their customers.
Corporation means body; capital means head. But corporate capital has neither head nor body. It is hard for people to attach themselves to a homogenised franchise owned by a hedge fund whose corporate identity consists of a filing cabinet in Panama City. So the machine needs a mask. It must wear the face of someone we see as often as we see our next-door neighbours. It is pointless to ask what Kim Kardashian does to earn her living: her role is to exist in our minds. By playing our virtual neighbour, she induces a click of recognition on behalf of whatever grey monolith sits behind her this week.
An obsession with celebrity does not lie quietly beside the other things we value; it takes their place. A study published in the journal Cyberpsychology reveals that an extraordinary shift appears to have taken place between 1997 and 2007 in the US. In 1997, the dominant values (as judged by an adult audience) expressed by the shows most popular among nine- to 11 year-olds were community feeling, followed by benevolence. Fame came 15th out of the 16 values tested. By 2007, when shows such as Hannah Montana prevailed, fame came first, followed by achievement, image, popularity and financial success. Community feeling had fallen to 11th, benevolence to 12th.
A paper in the International Journal of Cultural Studies found that, among the people it surveyed in the UK, those who follow celebrity gossip most closely are three times less likely than people interested in other forms of news to be involved in local organisations, and half as likely to volunteer. Virtual neighbours replace real ones.
The blander and more homogenised the product, the more distinctive the mask it needs to wear. This is why Iggy Pop was used to promote motor insurance and Benicio del Toro is used to sell Heineken. The role of such people is to suggest that there is something more exciting behind the logo than office blocks and spreadsheets. They transfer their edginess to the company they represent. As soon they take the cheque that buys their identity, they become as processed and meaningless as the item they are promoting.
The celebrities you see most often are the most lucrative products, extruded through a willing media by a marketing industry whose power no one seeks to check. This is why actors and models now receive such disproportionate attention, capturing much of the space once occupied by people with their own ideas: their expertise lies in channelling other people’s visions.
A database search by the anthropologist Grant McCracken reveals that in the US actors received 17% of the cultural attention accorded to famous people between 1900 and 1910: slightly less than physicists, chemists and biologists combined. Film directors received 6% and writers 11%. Between 1900 and 1950, actors had 24% of the coverage, and writers 9%. By 2010, actors accounted for 37% (over four times the attention natural scientists received), while the proportion allocated to both film directors and writers fell to 3%.
You don’t have to read or watch many interviews to see that the principal qualities now sought in a celebrity are vapidity, vacuity and physical beauty. They can be used as a blank screen on to which anything can be projected. With a few exceptions, those who have least to say are granted the greatest number of platforms on which to say it.
This helps to explain the mass delusion among young people that they have a reasonable chance of becoming famous. A survey of 16-year-olds in the UK revealed that 54% of them intend to become celebrities.
As soon as celebrities forget their allotted role, the hounds of hell are let loose upon them. Lily Allen was the media’s darling when she was advertising John Lewis. Gary Lineker couldn’t put a foot wrong when he stuck to selling junk food to children. But when they expressed sympathy for refugees, they were torn to shreds. When you take the corporate shilling, you are supposed to stop thinking for yourself.
Celebrity has a second major role: as a weapon of mass distraction. The survey published in the IJCS I mentioned earlier also reveals that people who are the most interested in celebrity are the least engaged in politics, the least likely to protest and the least likely to vote. This appears to shatter the media’s frequent, self-justifying claim that celebrities connect us to public life.
The survey found that people fixated by celebrity watch the news on average as much as others do, but they appear to exist in a state of permanent diversion. If you want people to remain quiescent and unengaged, show them the faces of Taylor Swift, Shia LaBeouf and Cara Delevingne several times a day.
In Trump we see a perfect fusion of the two main uses of celebrity culture: corporate personification and mass distraction. His celebrity became a mask for his own chaotic, outsourced and unscrupulous business empire. His public image was the perfect inversion of everything he and his companies represent. As presenter of the US version of The Apprentice, this spoilt heir to humongous wealth became the face of enterprise and social mobility. During the presidential elections, his noisy persona distracted people from the intellectual void behind the mask, a void now filled by more lucid representatives of global capital.
Celebrities might inhabit your life, but they are not your friends. Regardless of the intentions of those on whom it is bequeathed, celebrity is the lieutenant of exploitation. Let’s turn our neighbours back into our neighbours, and turn our backs on those who impersonate them.
A fully linked version of this column will be published at monbiot.com
Outdoor air pollution has grown by 8% around the world in the last five years, according to new data by the World Health Organization. Some of the world’s biggest cities have significantly high pollution levels.
Take New York, for example. A recent NYU study looked at the health of 300,000 residents and concluded that individuals living in zipcodes with higher concentrations of pollution – as measured by the Environmental Protection Agency – had a 24% higher chance of having artery constriction.
Now, a New York City-based designer thinks he might have the solution. To the awareness problem, at least. Nikolas Gregory Bentel recently released a new line of long-sleeved shirts called Aerochromics, which change colors according to pollution levels in the air. The shirts are priced starting at $500.
“Aerochromics is a statement on the rapid deterioration of the our world’s air quality,” Bentel says. “Air quality is only one small part of the larger spectrum of the pollution that we are slowly seeing taking hold of our planet.”
The shirts are available in three black-and-white designs, and took Bentel one year to develop. The shirts track different pollutants – carbon monoxide, particulate pollution and radiation – and work similarly to a household carbon monoxide detector. Chemical salts turn carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide, and that oxidation process transforms the color of the shirts. If carbon monoxide levels fall and oxygen levels increase, the colors change again.
While countless smartphone apps can tell you pollution levels, Bentel argues that rather than turning to phones, tablets and computers that have to be carried around, apparel can do more than just be a fashion statement. “The shirt forces the user to be aware of pollution levels constantly,” he says. “I wanted to apply this tech to an object that was already being used without hesitation every day and was visible from any direction.”
To test particle pollution – one of the biggest concerns for cities with low air quality – Bentel’s shirts use two sensors placed in the front and the back. A micro-controller in the shirts’ collar activates heat pads, changing the shirts’ colors from black to spotted. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, anything above 51 on the Air Quality Index (AQI) is a “moderate” health concern. Aerochromics shirts go into effect at 60, slowly shifting to the black-and-white pattern. But as the AQI escalates, reaching 160, or “unhealthy”, the shirts’ complete pattern becomes apparent.
A different version of the Aerochromics shirt changes permanently when exposed to radiation. Exposure of gamma or electron beam radiation causes dyes in the shirt to change color. Once the shirt is exposed to significant amounts of radiation, it remains in that color and pattern.
Funded personally through income from his design studio in Queens, Aerochromics is not Bentel’s first venture. He also created Ripley, a ring that gets its oxidized finish by going through a person’s digestive system; Data Arbitrage, a program that floods the market with fake social media accounts to dilute data resale values; and Higher Tides, a fake real estate company that claims to help buyers find real estate that would retain value post the impact of climate change.
Considering this background in art meets activism, it’s unclear who, exactly, these shirts are targeting. Bentel says he has a “stream of customers”, but refused to provide any more information, or access to them. However, he promises the cost of the shirts will fall in the future, making them more reasonably priced. “This was my first product run for the shirts so I wanted to be sure there was a demand before bringing down the cost,” he says.
Bentel also says a number of academic institutions and commercial companies have also reached out to him about the shirts, but withheld names. “I am not too interested in selling a lot of the clothing,” Bentel says. “The online shop is secondary to the concept. I see Aerochromics first as a statement.”
So is it business or is it art? “This seems like a novel type of clothing line that might, because of the novelty, become fashionable,” says Mark Jacobson, professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford University.
Aerochromics isn’t the first project to blend environmental concerns with technology and fashion. In 2011, two New York City students designed sweatshirts that changed color when met with high levels of carbon monoxide. More recently, Kasia Molga, a British artist and designer who suffers from asthma, premiered a new line of wearable technology that responds to air quality. The project, titled Human Sensor, made its debut in Manchester, England’s industrial hub, as models paraded around the city in the futuristic designs, illustrating how pollution levels change.
But, for all the efforts to raise awareness, Aerochromics doesn’t actually offer any practical solutions. The shirts are made with conventional cotton, not organic cotton, which has been criticized by environmentalists for harsh use of pesticides and insecticides, a type of chemical pollutants.
Whether Bentel’s shirts will change the dialogue on urban pollution remains to be seen. “It makes people more aware of the pollution around them,” Jacobson concedes.
In particular, he points to the air pollution and carbon monoxide shirts. If these change color when exposed to cigarette smoke, which contains both ingredients, it could be a deterrent to smoking as well. “It might make smokers more cognizant of the pollution they are inflicting on non-smokers,” Jacobson says.
Prostate has long been the Cinderella of cancers, lagging behind others – in particular breast cancer – when it comes to diagnosis, treatment and the funding that goes into research.
But scientists at University College London have made what they believe is a real breakthrough using a drug derived from bacteria found at the bottom of the sea, injected into the bloodstream and activated in the prostate by laser beams. There is also massive excitement from patients, who have been calling UCL ever since the news got out.
The really good news is that this treatment has been shown to kill cancerous cells in the prostate without the serious and sometimes life-changing consequences of surgery. A radical operation to remove the whole prostate gland risks leaving patients incontinent or impotent. That’s why for so many years the standard of care has been to operate only on men who are at high risk of the disease progressing and becoming a killer. The rest are assigned to active surveillance. That means regular testing to ensure the cancer is not spreading – but no treatment. Even symptom-free, many men find that psychologically hard to live with.
Among those under surveillance are men at very low risk, who are very likely to die with their cancer and not of it. But for others at higher risk of the cancer spreading, the new therapy could be really helpful.
The study by Mark Emberton and colleagues, published in the Lancet Oncology journal, tells us a lot about the promise of this therapy, but does not answer all the questions about its future. It could not, Emberton told the Guardian, because the authors had to find a design for the trial that would satisfy the European medicines regulator but without the advantage of technologies that have advanced massively in just the last few years.
“The prostate cancer landscape has been changing so quickly that no trial could keep up with the pace of change,” he said. When they started, just five years ago, MRI scans were not universally available and they had to guess where in the prostate the cancer was. Biopsies are hit or miss.
The researchers focused on 400 men at low risk and treated half with the therapy, placing optical fibres into the prostate to carry the laser beam. The drug is made from bacteria that live on the ocean floor and are adept at converting any light into high intensity energy, which then kills cancer cells when activated in the prostate without harming normal tissue. The other group were given active surveillance as normal.
At the end of two years, the cancer had progressed in 28% of treated patients compared with 58% of those on active surveillance. It was not a clean sweep, but, says Emberton, if they were to do the study now, with the help of MRI scans, they could hit the cancerous parts of the prostate rather than going in blind and the results would be much better. There were side-effects, but mostly they had cleared up by the end of the two years.
What nobody can know is whether the cancer will stay away – the treated patients will be monitored for years to find out.
Emberton and the charity Prostate Cancer UK think the therapy will be most useful in patients in the grey zone – between low and high risk – although for the purposes of the study they had to do it with those at low risk. It is not for everyone. Those at very low risk are still better off with no treatment and no side-effects.
The idea of a drug made of harmless bacteria that can be activated by light to become cancer killers is not a new one. Photodynamic therapy is already being used to treat skin cancer and others where light can easily penetrate. Unfortunately, it has also been abused. Quack clinics offer unproven PDT for brain and other cancers that lasers cannot reach, taking huge amounts of money from families trying everything to save the life of a child.
But this new technology, says Emberton, has been very carefully developed and he believes it could have application in other forms of cancer. He hopes it will get a licence and be approved for use in the NHS – as early as possible, because for now, all they can tell their many callers is that the trial is over and the treatment is no longer available.
Some people use Strava’s GPS feature to create intricate designs; others to draw rude pictures. But London runner Owen Delaney has been getting into the Christmas spirit. He spent an hour planning the first routes in the city’s Bushy Park before the Christmas spirit really started to move him. Enjoy some of his creations, and have a very happy Christmas ...
A clever book club for children up to about the age of 11, Bookabees offers personalised book lists for each child, plus stickers and activities. Return the books after two months or pay to keep them. £4.99 (one book a month); £8.99 (three books); £10.99 (five books), bookabees.com
Christmas isn’t all it’s wrapped up to be
You’ll not find it mentioned in carols or pictured on cards, but phalaenopsis orchids fly off the shelves in supermarkets, big box DIY shops and chic florists alike in December. This obsession is not new, nor is it limited to Christmas: we have been coveting orchids since the first plant hunters were sent across the globe in the eighteenth century to track down specimens at great expense, and often at the cost of their lives.
To trace this orchidelirium back through history, I recommend reading The Orchid Thief by Susan Orlean. It is not a pretty story, in places. Orlean writes: “Because orchid hunters hated the thought of another hunter’s finding any plants they might have missed, they would ‘collect out’ an area, and then they would burn the place down.” Unfortunately an illegal trade in orchids ripped from the wild continues today, although the vast majority of commercially-available moth orchids are hybrids mass produced via tissue culture techniques developed in the 1970s. You can watch a video of a UK orchid greenhouse in production here. Referring back to my previous post on mistletoe, it’s worth noting that moth orchids are not parasites or even hemiparasites, but epiphytes - they use trees as an anchor point, but gain no sustenance from them.
Phalaenopsis make great gifts, and for about the same price as a hand-tied bouquet, they should last far longer, provided if you follow some simple rules. If you find it hard to keep moth orchids alive, or simply want to try something different, try a cape primrose, aka streptocarpus. They are available from many garden centres, and Dibleys Nursery in Wales provide a mail order gift service for these easygoing houseplants.
This is the bit where I try to find something positive to say about poinsettias as a houseplant, and fail. I must be in a minority in my unalloyed hatred of this plant*, as they are still hugely popular. I write “as a houseplant”, because look at pictures of growing in their native Mexico and other parts of the world where the climate is right, and they are rather charming shrubs (or in some cases, trees).
But indoors, my problem with them is twofold: they are hard to keep alive in the average house, and then people will insist on treating them as permanent residents. You can try to keep your poinsettia until next Christmas so it can rebloom, but you will have to look at an ugly plant all year and you’ll still fail, most likely. In his still unsurpassed book The Houseplant Expert, Dr DG Hessayon explains an important distinction between flowering pot plants and houseplants: about the former he writes: “Don’t choose a flowering pot plant if you want something which will permanently adorn your living room.”
Nevertheless, like many iconic plants, poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima) has an interesting backstory if you care to look: the Aztecs called it cuetlaxochitl (brilliant flower), made a purple dye from its bracts and a fever medicine from its sap. Joel Roberts Poinsett, US ambassador to Mexico, brought it home from his travels in 1825. Just as for moth orchids, plant breeders in the 1960s worked hard to make the poinsettia more colourful, compact and floriferous, making it the blockbuster Christmas plant it is today.
If you have bought one of these and want to keep it alive at least until the new year, it requires humidity - achieved by grouping plants together and/or standing the pot on a tray filled with pebbles and water - careful watering (let the compost dry out between applications) and bright light but not direct sunlight. If you still want rush out and buy a poinsettia, at least consider plant miles - look for the Home Grown logo which indicates the plant was grown in the UK.
*No, the white ones aren’t any better.
Given the current craze for cacti, I’d hoped for a revival in the fate of the Schlumbergera, a plant you probably last saw in a basket pot on your grandmother’s console table circa 1979. The Christmas cactus (close relatives Schlumbergera truncata and S. × buckleyi are both referred to by this common name) is, like the moth orchid, aother epiphyte, hanging around in the shade of the tropical rainforests of Brazil, being pollinated by hummingbirds.
I can’t find who first described their flowers as resembling leaping shrimps, but they were absolutely right. The blooms come in all possible shades of pink, white and purple, although new orange and yellow cultivars are being developed by breeders.
For a wonderfully geeky post about Schlumbergera breeding and all things Christmas cactus-related, visit the houseplant blog Plants Are The Strangest People. For a shorter read, there’s care advice in this piece by Alys Fowler.
If you are looking for knockout scent to fill your house this Christmas, this is the flowering bulb you need. Tazetta daffodil types - usually the paperwhite narcissus N. ‘Ziva’ - is specially prepared to flower in time for December 25. It’s too late to plant now, but seek out pre-planted arrangements. There’s a secret to stopping them from growing too leggy and flopping over, and it involves vodka. Seriously.
One word of warning: not everyone loves the perfume of paperwhites. As Fragrant Earth (a self-described “olfactory blog”) explains, one component of the paperwhites’ unmistakeable scent is indole, and some people’s noses find this adds a fetid edge that’s really rather unpleasant. So you may want to sniff before you try.
Before we go any further, let’s just get the nomenclature issue out of the way. The popular name is amaryllis, but despite an ongoing debate, hippeastrum is generally accepted as being correct.
Naming is the most boring aspect of a truly mindboggling plant. There is something monstrous and wonderful about the hippeastrum. I don’t think anyone has put it better than Monty Don, who once wrote in the Observer: “The flower stem develops as a phallic joke before opening out into a huge funnel like the horn on a wind-up gramophone.” Sounds like fun, doesn’t it?
Hippeastrum, like any popular houseplant, have been bred into a variety of degrees of gaudiness; although as Alys Fowler points out in this column from last year, there are members of the clan that are more subtle - stylish even. Personally, I’d buy the brashiest, brightest hippeastrum you can find: they just make me chuckle with glee. I know this contradicts my previous statements about brash poinsettias, but plant love never was logical.
You may be keeping watch on a hippeastrum bud right now, wondering if it will break open in time for Christmas. Or may receive a “bulb kit” as a gift. If you fancy investing in a plant to cheer up your spring, Laidback Gardener has an excellent blogpost on the drawbacks of those “everything you need” growing kits and how to choose a bare bulb.
Relegated to the bottom of the festive booze hierarchy, beer tends to gets a bad rap at Christmas. Unfairly so, because seasonal beers can be so much more than cans of lager that accumulate dust at parties while everyone guzzles eggnog. Belgian breweries have been turning out unabashedly sweet, spicy winter ales for centuries, and now everyone else, from craft breweries to supermarkets, has followed suit.
While anything that tastes like the boozy run-off from Christmas pudding is welcome at my dinner table, the best festive beers should also have a sense of occasion about them. Or at least the potential for pantomime drama, whether that comes from tapping a mini-keg without it detonating, or attempting to mull a bottle of cherry beer (from experience these are activities best attempted before, not after, drinking an 11% stout).
Here are some of the best traditional – and not so traditional – Christmas beers to enjoy this year.
With a name like plum pudding porter, this generous beer could have rolled straight out of a Dickens novel. It radiates ripe, stone fruit – plums and apricots – and Christmas spice. In the glass, it’s a thick, almost impenetrable, Christmas pudding brown, with sugary marzipan and spice on the nose. Juicy and fruity and dark, but with a porter’s roasted malty backbone of coffee and bitter chocolate.
The innovative Danish brewer’s modern take on a Belgian Christmas ale has all the booziness you’d expect of a strong Belgian beer, without being sickly sweet. Glowing golden amber in the glass, it smells like warmed fruit and berries, and tastes like caramel, with a hint of astringency that could come from the coriander seeds it’s brewed with. Because it is so full-bodied, the rich, candied orange peel taste lingers and lingers – this would be amazing paired with dark chocolate and dried fruit.
One to enjoy after Midnight Mass, this abbey-style beer (which effectively means it’s brewed by monks but doesn’t fulfil the strict criteria needed to be considered a Trappist beer) is a Christmas classic. Boasting a strong, brandy-like nose, with a slightly sour note, it tastes rich and sweet and has a musty, barrel-aged depth. Brewed with liquorice, there’s also a very subtle undercurrent of salt and aniseed.
Meantime’s broody dark ale promises all the fun of popping a champagne cork without the price tag and with a (potentially) milder hangover. Served in a wine bottle with a cork, it smells like dark chocolate and woodsmoke, but tastes like juicy berries. There is a whiff of port from the barrel-ageing process, but not enough to make it taste heavy or winey – it’s more like molten, fizzy, dark cherry chocolate.
A mischievous little beer that packs an extraordinary – 10% ABV kind of extraordinary – punch. It’s thick, dense and orange in look and taste; slightly floral on the nose, with some botanicals. It also has a juicy, mango mouthfeel (so, one for fans of strong IPA) and sticky toffee notes that give way to citrus bitterness at the end – think candied orange peel. This is a beer that ages really well, and the 2015 is delicious at the moment. Look out for the 2016 early next year and stash it in the cellar if you’ve got the self-control.
One for real ale enthusiasts. British hops lend this beer an earthy body that’s a welcome break from the sweet fruitiness of a lot of Christmas beer. There is a little spiciness and a touch of sweet candy and raisin, but nothing overpowering – and nothing you’d object to if you drank it by the pint, or used it to wash down roast potatoes.
Adnams ale is usually evocative of summers spent at its seaside brewery and warm afternoons eating fish and chips on the shore. But its Christmas ale – available, to my intense delight, in a DIY keg – is its wintry, fireside twin. Pouring a mahogany brown, this is a festive beer for drinkers who want to get as far away from nutmeg and dried cherry flavours as possible: it is toasty, caramel and toffee-ish, with all the depth of the brewery’s distinctive yeast. 
Fabulously bitter, this cranberry stout is a great refresher to enjoy at the end of a long night of sweet wine and port. It pours jet black with a thick head and smells like coffee, nuts, chocolates and vanilla. So far, so stout, which means that the taste – almost burned, like cocoa nibs and espresso – is a welcome surprise. This beer is not as creamy as you might expect and any sweetness comes from the tart cranberries it has been brewed with.
With its soft banana and herb notes, this offering from the famous St Bernardus brewery in Belgium is one for fans of wheat beers. It is punchy and strong at 10% ABV. Factor in the cloves and Christmas spices it is laced with and this will keep you positively toasty this winter.
Mulled beer sounds like the kind of bad idea you might have at the end of a raucous Christmas party. In fact, this warmable cherry beer is an absolute world-beater. Heat it gently, as you would wine and it gives off the most overwhelming rich cherry, spice and marzipan aroma. Like mulled wine it tastes best glugged from a mug – all sweet fruit and cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves, but with none of the spice detritus to deal with at the end. Don’t try to drink this cold, and it’s probably best not try mulling any other beers you have lying around. 
Every year, usually in October, we visit Maremma, a glorious cummerbund of a region straddling lower Tuscany and higher Lazio. We stay at the same hotel, an old-fashioned place that sits in folds of green, run impeccably and kindly by a woman called Graziella, who looks like a combination of Isabella Rossellini, Patricia Routledge and Robin Williams as Mrs Doubtfire. We do the same things: lie in sulphurous hot springs, have one monumental argument, walk, play cards. We eat the same things: aquacotta, white beans, peppery beef stew, bread, and drink red wine. Maremmani know how to cook white beans, simmering them until tender, often in terracotta, and occasionally in time-honoured fashion, al fiasco, in a glass flask in the embers of a fire. Fat, tender, creamy and often still warm, the beans are served with a little of their own broth and some extra virgin olive oil – you can’t talk about white beans in Tuscany without talking about extra virgin olive oil. If Rome taught me to love beans, Maremma made me a bean-eater.
There are plenty of strongly held opinions about cooking beans in Maremma … in Tuscany ... in Italy. Just like learning a language, you listen and repeat; then once you are confident, you do it your way. Then you may get stuck in your ways, digging in your kitchen heels. I am not sure why I had never thought to cook beans in the oven before – which is nearest to the embers, I suppose – but I hadn’t. I now know it is a good way, producing plump, deeply flavoured beans. Not that you can’t get beautifully flavoured beans on the stove top, but it must be something about the effect of baking as opposed to boiling heat, the taste of both beans and broth is richer and rounder somehow. Same with sage and garlic. In the oven, the sage loses its aggressive bitterness, taking on a savoury, almost meaty fragrance. Garlic, too, benefits from baking; it brings out its kinder side, the inside of the cloves becoming so sweet and soft they can be squeezed from the skin like cream from a tube. I add salt to the beans, along with the oil and herbs. (Seasoning at the start is different to seasoning at the end – I don’t believe it toughens the beans as some people say – but if you prefer, add salt at the end.)
Remembering to soak the beans – that’s the thing. One way is never to put them away, even if it is in a large, possibly attractive Kilner jar. Leave them in slightly irritating full view. A friend once suggested leaving beans beside the corkscrew, so when you open a bottle at night, you skittle the beans into a bowl and cover them with water for an overnight swell. The next morning, as you make coffee or tea, you cook them.
Apart from the soak, and the initial almost-boil, these beans really are no bother – five things gathered together, then you let the oven work its everyday alchemy. There are some who think low and slow is best. Just over an hour at 170C works for me.
So what to do with your beans? 450g of beans provides enough for two meals for four people. You could eat them as they do in Maremma, with more olive oil, bread and red wine. Alternatively, they are excellent with fat sausages. You decide whether you want them brothy, or slightly creamier – in which case puree a few beans and then mix them back in.
Then there is minestrone. Fry a soffritto of carrot, onion and celery in extra virgin olive oil. Add a diced potato, some pumpkin, a handful of kale, some parmesan rind and cover with enough bean broth and water to make up a litre. Simmer for 40 minutes and add the beans in the last 10 minutes. If you have leftover minestrone, you could ribollire – reboil and serve it over old bread for ribollita.
So there you have it: suggestions for bean eating as we say goodbye – possibly good riddance – to 2016. I am just glad my brother Ben is too busy doing three shows a day as pantomime dame to read the papers at this time of year, otherwise he might be tempted to leave an aerated comment.
Enough for two meals for four people
450g dry cannellini beans
3 garlic cloves
6 sage leaves
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt
1 Soak the beans in plenty of cold water for 10 hours. Drain and rinse the beans then return to a large ovenproof pot or casserole with a lid. Cover with cold water, making sure the water comes a good couple of fingers above the beans.
2 Preheat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3½. On the stove top, over a medium-low heat, bring the beans slowly to just-before-the-boil (they mustn’t boil), skimming away any surface foam, then add the whole, unpeeled cloves of garlic, sage, a good pinch of salt and olive oil. Cover the pan with the lid and transfer to the oven for 1 hour and 15 minutes, or until the beans are tender and surrounded by just a little cloudy broth. Check the seasoning and squeeze the garlic from the skin and stir it into the broth if you wish. Serve alone with more olive oil on top, with sausages, or as part of a soup.
• Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard) and winner of the André Simon food book award
I’m a bit of a Scrooge at Christmastime, often choosing to give experiences over things, eschewing plastic toys whenever possible, and usually making a vegetarian meal instead of the classic roast turkey. But even I can’t deny the allure of a beautifully wrapped gift.
It’s still possible to make eco-friendly choices while also giving gorgeously wrapped presents; the holiday season truly doesn’t have to mean expensive paper and tons of waste. Each year, the US spends over $3.2bn on wrapping paper and each year Britons throw out enough gift wrap to circle the globe nine times.
Here are some ways to say bah humbug to these costly, wasteful ways and embrace a green Christmas in 2016.
This famous line from The Sound of Music sums up the happy charm of a simply wrapped gift, one that remains even in today’s over-the-top culture. It’s easy to create a waste-free version of this wrapping style by reusing paper grocery bags (turned inside out and cut to fit) or by reusing paper packaging.
Depending what look I’m going for, I’ll either let my daughter decorate the paper with her drawings, or tuck a sprig of fresh greenery into the bow. Simple, pretty and waste-free.
As a lifelong book lover, I’ve always been partial to the look of gifts wrapped in newspaper. The crisp black text on a white background lends a modern, abstract look and a thick red fabric ribbon keeps it looking luxe (I buy fabric ribbons instead of the plastic kind and also save them from gifts I receive). This is a fantastic way to use up newspapers headed to the recycling bin and kids love getting their presents wrapped in the comics section.
The Japanese practice of wrapping gifts in reusable cloth dates back to the 1600s, but it has enjoyed a bit of a comeback recently as a beautiful, waste-free wrapping choice.
Whether you’re a quilter with extra fabric scraps lying around or you want to include a scarf or tea towel as part of your gift, wrapping presents in fabric is a striking departure from thin, crinkly wrapping paper. Secondhand stores are a fantastic source for beautiful silk scarves and if you’re really handy you can even sew reusable fabric gift bags.
My daughter is a prolific artist (thankfully she hasn’t yet explored the blank canvas of my walls) so I began saving the art roll from her easel. When it’s time to wrap gifts for Christmas or her friend’s birthday parties, I use the painted paper instead of gift wrap. It’s a nice way to reuse something I’d feel guilty throwing out and our family loves seeing their gifts decorated with her wild paintings. 
Now that we’ve got gift-giving sorted, what do you do with the wrapping paper on gifts received from others?
Well, despite my affection for the rip-and-tear folks among us (who can begrudge such unbridled enthusiasm?) I have absolutely no shame in being that person who carefully peels off tape and neatly folds gift wrap for later use.
Doing so reduces waste and allows an opportunity for reuse, but another reason to save that pretty paper is because a good portion of wrapping products aren’t recyclable. 
That’s right, although it’s called wrapping paper, many kinds of gift wrap are actually made with shiny foil or coated in plastic film, rendering it unfit for the recycling bin. Same goes for plastic ribbons and bows (they’re inexpensive and pretty but can’t be recycled) and tissue paper (which is best reused or tossed in a compost bin if you’ve got one).
The best way to ensure you’re disposing of wrapping products properly is by checking with your local recycling department. A quick Google search of “[Your city/town] recycling guidelines” will let you know what your local recycling service prefers you to with these festive trappings.
Of course, the most effective way to reduce wrapping paper waste is to reduce gifts altogether. Consider organizing a secret santa exchange, getting just one or two gifts per child, and giving experiences instead of things. A certain Mr Grinch said it best:
Make a batter by beating together 2 large eggs and 300ml of full fat milk. Beat in a little salt and 125g of plain flour. Don’t worry about any small lumps. Pull the leaves from 5 sprigs of thyme and stir them into the batter then leave it to rest for 20 minutes. Set the oven at 220C/gas mark 8. Evenly brown 350g of cocktail chipolatas in a little oil or bacon fat. When they are done, add 2 tbsp of marmalade and 100g of fresh or frozen cranberries to the pan and toss the sausages in it to coat them evenly. Pour the fat, together with 3 tbsp of groundnut oil or dripping into a 22cm round metal dish or similar baking tin, add the marmalade-coated sausages and place in the oven to get hot. When the oil and sausages are really hot, add the batter and return to the oven immediately. Bake for 12-15 minutes until the batter is golden and puffed around the edges. Serve immediately. Enough for 2.
Like its sister recipe the Yorkshire pudding, this one needs really hot fat if it is to achieve any sort of lightness. Let the oil and sausages get as hot as you dare, the oil may shimmer, even smoke a little, before you add the batter in one swoosh. If a thin layer of batter firms up immediately on contact with the hot fat, then the pudding should rise well.
Pieces of pancetta or smoked bacon are good here, as is black pudding, either instead of or in addition to the sausages. If cranberries are unavailable, try small cubes of sharp apple instead.
Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater
At the start of the new year people often vow to give up certain habits such as to stop smoking, biting their nails, or eating unhealthily. But instead of working out what to quit, perhaps it’s time to think about what to take up. 
In Gretchen Rubin’s book Better Than Before she argues that our habits have the capacity to lengthen or shorten our lives. And what we do every day matters more than what we do occasionally. Rubin tested habit-changing methods on herself and on others, and found that the business of habit formation is extremely personal. 
So what habits did you take up that changed your life? We want to hear suggestions and stories. Maybe you decided to do 15 minutes of yoga every morning, or changed your commute to work so that you walked the last part of your journey. Perhaps you created limits around how much you use digital technology, or built specific time into your week to see friends? And what about eating, drinking, creativity and meditation? Tell us about the one small change that has made the biggest difference to your life.
On Saturday morning I was informed that the Mail on Sunday was going to run a story about how my 10 week-old daughter’s birth certificate didn’t include Tim Rice’s name. The father’s name had been left blank on the birth certificate.
The newspaper had evidently sent some hack around various London borough register offices armed with my daughter’s name and my full name and date of birth. And hey presto, at Westminster register office on Harrow Road, they struck it lucky. According to section 30 of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953, “Any person shall be entitled to search the said indexes at any time when the General Register Office is open for that purpose, and to have a certified copy of any entry in the said certified copies, on payment to the Registrar General.”
So for the princely sum of £9.25, they will have been issued with a certified copy of the long-form birth certificate for my daughter. Exactly the same version of the certificate that I will use to apply for her passport. Let’s hope an identity fraudster doesn’t beat me to it.
I am in no way critical of the Mail on Sunday, far from it. It shows good journalism. They went out and found a story. Also in the same paper was a story about the actress Cressida Bonas’s financial assets gleaned from her company accounts. Register offices, Companies House – it had clearly been research week on the Mail on Sunday.
It is the fact they were able to do what they did that makes me shudder. What I and perhaps many people don’t realise is that the long-form birth certificate is a publicly available record. There is no 30-year rule and no special hoops to jump through to get a copy. My daughter’s full name, the hospital she was born in, her date of birth, my full name, the town where I was born, my date of birth and, terrifyingly, our current address (although the Mail on Sunday didn’t print this) are all recorded on that birth certificate, that public document.
There are two types of UK birth certificate. The short-form and the long-form. If you were born before 1983 then it is most likely that you’ve only ever seen your short-form birth certificate (the one printed in red ink). That’s because until 1983, the short-form certificate was considered evidence enough of a person’s name and date of birth. The short-form certificate is actually titled the “certificate of birth” and contains a person’s full name, sex, date of birth and registration district of birth. It is given free of charge when you register a birth. What we call the full birth certificate is actually a “certified copy of an entry on the register” and is the certificate that contains every bit of data you might actually want protected.
In the age of social media, I have long tried to keep this kind of information to myself. The year of my birth has been a thing of myth – when the papers wrote about my pregnancy back in May I was reported as all ages from 28 to 38. As a private individual, I dislike my address being publicly available. The press coverage I’ve had this year has resulted in some rather loony approaches to me via the internet. Now, any Tom, Dick or Harry can post me their missives. It seems utterly pointless to opt out of the electoral roll now. Maybe it’s easier to move.
But while I’m only slightly disturbed on the “what if?” scale, imagine a circumstance where a woman has been terrorised, assaulted or harassed. As soon as she registers a birth of her child, her abuser can find out where she lives. Surely this can’t be right? Why should the long-form birth certificate of a minor be a publicly available document?
People may argue the genealogists’ line – that it’s important for family historians to trace a family tree. But birth certificates of the very young can be changed. I have 12 months to change my daughter’s first name if I so desire. And if her father wishes to be added to the birth certificate, that too can happen. And if we both decided to change her surname, we could.
Therefore my daughter’s birth certificate could look very different in a year’s time. So why should it be a public record now? Perhaps in 18 years’ time, but the short-form certificate should be evidence enough of a birth. As a proud new mother I’ve been very careful not to annoy my friends and “over-share” on Facebook – but it seems the government does enough of that for me in the public realm.
From books and beauty products to beer and bird food, these gifts keep on giving long after Father Christmas has returned home
There not much time left, but enough to avoid turning up with flowers from the garage. From monogrammed notebooks and beanies to bodies and knits, here are 50 gifts for her
Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls cost £1.03 per minute from a BT landline. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
The most festive houses in Britain – in pictures
Of all the beverages, champagne will reveal the ignoramus most brutally.
There’s the sparkling wine versus champagne debate, heated opinions about the best temperature to serve it, long discussions to be had about the most advantageous shape of the glass in which it is served, how the cork must be eased from the bottle not with a pop but with a ladylike sigh, and all manner of curious “did you know?” facts that bubble up at a table of wine aficionados. The fiddly riddling of the bottles, the legend of the accidental secondary fermentation that created the signature bubbles in the first place, the chalkiness of the terroir, the shape of Marie Antoinette’s breast, and yada yada yada, everyone’s an expert.
Except, that is, for the four Guardian Australian writers who submitted to a blind tasting of six sparkling wines of varying price and provenance. In an effort to find their inner champagne snobs just in time for Christmas (and to work out what to buy), they were guided through the tasting by the actual-expert hand of sommelier Samantha Payne of Nomad Restaurant and Wine Store.
As Payne says, when buying wines we are very guided by labels and prices, and the same labels and prices influence what we taste. So six wines were chosen with fairly loose parameters: two from Australia, two French (one from the supermarket chain Aldi), and one each from Italy and Spain. Ranging in price from $17 to $129, they were covered in foil so none of the guinea pigs could see what they were tasting or know how it would impact their bank balance. They had to rely on the senses of taste and smell only.
Just like art, it was a matter of “I don’t know much, but I know what I like”. And that’s all that matters, right? Here are their tasting notes. Cheers.
I come to champagne tasting with some set views. I don’t love the most expensive French champagnes. I find their complex, slightly dusty flavours overwhelming. I like less fashionable dry, fruity sparkling wines that cost about half as much. Or at least that’s what I tell myself when I know what’s in my glass. But a blind tasting is the ultimate test.
The first bubbly to pour from the anonymous foil-covered bottles is too sweet and acidic. It’d be OK at a picnic, but it’s not great. I give it three out of five. It turns out to be prosecco at $20 a bottle. I’ve never been a huge prosecco fan.
I don’t like the second one at all. It’s sweet and bland, a little bit Passion Pop. One out of five. Turns out to be the $17 Jacob’s Creek Trilogy and for my not particularly sophisticated palate, you’d be getting what you paid for.
The third one has a bit of that dusty taste I associate with the champagnes I’m slightly embarrassed not to love, but the fourth has that full complex French champagne flavour. I give them both a four. I figure they’re both probably French. Actually, the third was Freixenet, at $18 a bottle, and the fourth is vintage Verve at $129 – so if, like me – you are obviously not a French champagne aficionado, the Freixenet is probably a bargain.
Number six made my tongue curl. It was revealed to be a cheaper French champagne.
My favourite was number five – a lovely dry mouthful of bubbles, simpler and more subtle than the Verve, fruity and citrusy and deliciously drinkable. Five out of five – my kind of sparkling. I’ll be buying the $37 Pirie Tasmanian sparkling wine for Christmas.
My qualifications for tasting sparkling wine involve only having consumed quite a lot of it. When I moved to the UK in 2003 and discovered how much cheaper champagne was there than in Australia, I got quite carried away with the drinking of it.
Later, after a trip to Italy, prosecco became my bubbly of choice and I could afford to buy it by the caseload – to serve as an Aperol spritz with a side of olives and lightly salted crisps.
So I knew the prosecco when I tasted it, and at $20, the Santa Margherita Prosecco di Valdo is great value for money and a perfect accompaniment to our Christmas Day entree of prawn cocktails.
If I were rich (I’m not), I would have no hesitation in shelling out $129 for the vintage Veuve – as soon as I dipped my nose into the glass and inhaled the buttery aroma I knew I was on to a winner. I admired the very fine bubbles in the glass and the long aftertaste reminded me of the best chardonnays I’ve tasted. It was hands-down my favourite of the six wines and I was not partaking in any of that spitting out nonsense, let me tell you. In fact, I asked for a second taste just to make sure it was my favourite.
I had more trouble identifying the other wines but the Tasmanian Pirie was also lovely to drink and I could quite happily quaff it at a cocktail party. The fine bubbles tingled on my lips, which was rather pleasant. For me, the real surprise was the cava. At $17, the vintage Freixenet seems a steal. As for the Jacob’s Creek, well, I might be happy to drink it at a pub at midnight, after I’d been drinking since lunchtime, but otherwise pass me the sparkling water please. And the less said about the acidic Monsigny champagne from Aldi, the better.
This Christmas, I’ll be serving the prosecco with the starters and the Pirie sparkling will be filling the stockings of some people I love. 
The prosecco felt immediately very minerally and acidic – with dense bubbles and dry finish. It had me craving seafood – oily fish like salmon would could go well with something like this, that truly cuts through.
The Jacob’s Creek Trilogy Cuvee Brut – yuck – was like a Fruit Tingle lolly with too much sugar and a greasy aftertaste. It is one to have at the end of Christmas Day perhaps – after your booze stocks are depleted and your palate is tired.
The Freixenet Vintage 2013 Reserve Cava was very drinkable and I could imagine being a good thirst quencher on a hot day. We stuck our noses to the glass as one of us said, “smell the oak”. It smelt like it was made from real fruit and in a barrel – as opposed to the Jacob’s Creek, which tasted vaguely chemical.
The Veuve was the best. It was buttery and golden, slightly acidic with an aftertaste that reminded me of chardonnay. Not only would this choice be great with Christmas lunch but it’s the sort of drink that would work well all by itself, or with a side of strawberries.
The Pirie sparkling from Tasmania was similar to the prosecco and tasted acidic enough to cut through the strongest Christmas flavours – brandy butter fruit pudding, slabs of seafood, creamy pavlova. By the sixth tasting I was beginning to feel as if I’d eaten an entire roast turkey. This was a slightly sweeter blend that had a tart, almost vinegary aftertaste.
My favourite – number four – was the most expensive, the Veuve Clicquot Vintage Gold 2004 (France) at $129 a pop. But if you want something more affordable, the Freixenet Vintage 2013 reserve Cava from Spain at $17 is good value.
I came into this tasting at the distinct disadvantage of having indulged in too much cheap sparkling at an event the night before. On the flipside, when the worst stuff touched my tongue it was like muscle memory: Jacob’s Creek Trilogy Cuvee Brut is bad and should feel bad.
When I’m looking for a sparkling, I want something dry, citrusy, light and subtle – nothing challenging. I’m looking for something to drink outside on a summer evening, with a seafood barbeque and a long night ahead. Nothing too sophisticated, but taste is taste.
I really enjoyed the prosecco; it was dry and would cut through seafood, and – importantly – it was bubbly enough to refresh a mild hangover. Perfect for Boxing Day lunch.
The Pirie sparkling was a favourite too – it was interesting without being overwhelming, but I found its aftertaste a little too sweet. (I picked its price point though, which brought me no small amount of smugness.) The cava was initially great, but got steadily worse the further down the glass I got, and when I went for a repour – in a tremendous show of collegial generosity, we brought the half-drunk bottles back to the office – it tasted kind of like garbage.
I loved the depth and complexity of the Veuve, and was strangely satisfied to have picked the most expensive wine as my favourite. But if I were to shop for the booze next weekend, on taste and price the prosecco would be my pick.
With thanks to the staff of Nomad Restaurant, Surry Hills.
When you don’t have anything kind to say about a year, you probably shouldn’t say anything at all. Far better instead to have an awards ceremony recognising the most memorable moments in a weird year for women.
On 19 May, Payne got into her car, took out a Chewbacca mask and proceeded to howl with verging-on-maniacal laughter for several minutes. There was a time when this might have got her sectioned; in 2016 it turned her into an internet celebrity. The Texan mum’s Chewbacca-chuckling was viewed over 160m times and Payne received about $420,000 (£340,000) worth of free gifts in the weeks after the video went viral.
Actually, make that the only instance of confusion between the potential closure of a legendary London nightclub and Britain’s decision to leave the EU. In September, Louise Mensch fired off some incensed tweets that muddled up the two, much to the amusement of, well, everyone. Don’t ask how or why: nobody knows what goes on in Mensch’s head before she tweets. Instead, take a moment to give thanks that Mensch is no longer an MP with anything to do with Brexiting.
In April, it was announced that abolitionist Tubman would replace slave-owning Andrew Jackson on the front of the US $20 bill. This makes Tubman the first woman in more than a century and the first African American ever to be on the front of a paper note. As Beyoncé said, always stay gracious, ladies – best revenge is your paper.
You have seen the photo, quickly heralded as an iconic image of non-violent resistance: 28-year-old Evans standing calmly in front of armoured officers at a protest against police brutality in Baton Rouge. The image was a striking juxtaposition of her flowing sundress and grace with their riot gear and guns. With the world getting increasingly bleak, it’s easy to feel hopeless. Evans is a reminder that a single person armed with nothing but courage can have a significant impact.
Immigration would not be the issue it is if they could all be like Melania.
Any Facebook rant that starts off with “CHEESE”, followed by 13 cheese emojis, is going to be gouda – but you don’t always expect it to change the world. In October, that’s what happened when one unidentified woman’s demands that vegan cheese be renamed “Gary or something ... BECAUSE IT’S NOT CHEESE!!!!!” went viral. The vegan community considered the suggestion caerphilly and decided it was great. Vegan cheese is now called Gary.
In October, Anderson brought some vegan Pret a Manger sandwiches to Wikileaks’ Julian Assange at the Eduadorian embassy and the pair lunched together. Shortly afterwards, fevered rumours began to spread that Assange was dead, murdered by the former Baywatch star with a Gary sandwich. Assange, alive and well, did little to quell these rumours.
In Italy, since 1992, someone has been selling bestsellers under a fake name: Elena Ferrante. It was basically the Panama Papers of the literary world – yet many people appear to have enjoyed Ferrante’s books, despite the deceit. Not investigative journalist Claudio Gatti, however. Outraged by all of this, Gatti “unmasked” Ferrante in October. Many people were disgusted by this invasion of privacy, but Gatti remains undeterred. His next scoop will be an exposé of everyone who raves about Ferrante, but hasn’t actually got around to reading her work yet.
Abedin has had an annus extremelyis horribilis. The long-time Hillary Clinton aide has had to deal with her (now estranged) husband, Anthony Weiner, getting embroiled in his third sexting scandal and the release of a high-profile documentary, Weiner, about their marriage. She has also been blamed for costing Clinton the election. Despite this, she kept calm and carried on.
In July, Joyce, a popular 19-year-old beauty vlogger, posted a weird YouTube video of her acting oddly as she modelled a dress. Some of her fans decided the video was actually a cryptic cry for help: Joyce had been kidnapped by Isis. The hashtag #SaveMarinaJoyce became the No 1 trending topic worldwide and the police were dispatched to Joyce’s house, where it was ascertained that, actually, it was just a weird video.
Who knew a swimsuit could divide a state? Probably not Siam (as she identified herself) when she went to a beach in Nice wearing a burkini in August. The 34-year-old soon found herself surrounded by armed police, who forced her to remove her excessive clothing and fined her for failing to wear “an outfit respecting good morals and secularism”. A country-wide row about the legality of burkini bans ensued. Because liberté, égalité, stupidité.
Taxpayers already give the Queen a £400,000-a-year alcohol allowance. You’d think that would be enough to cover a decent 90th birthday bash (street-party tickets cost £150 each) but Britain decided to go all out this year for Her Majesty. Austerity be damned.
November evening. A small soiree. James Blunt jokes to Princess Beatrice that he wouldn’t mind being Sir James. The Princess, spying a ceremonial sword, decides to knight him on the spot. Being new to the knighting thing, she misses and the un-blunt sword slashes Ed Sheeran in the face. This is not absurd fanfic, it is just another night at the Royal Lodge in Windsor.
Banks directed and produced Pitch Perfect 2. You should forgive her for this, however, because, as well as being a longtime campaigner for Planned Parenthood, Banks has been working to increase the representation of women in Hollywood onscreen and off. In April, she launched WhoHaha, a new website dedicated “to [shining] a spotlight on funny women”. Apparently, there are a few around.
Even Wonder Woman, it seems, can’t have it all. Despite being blessed with a body of impossible proportions and a superhero skillset, the comic book character was deemed unsuitable for her role as the UN honorary ambassador for the empowerment of women and girls. She lasted two months in the position.
Only £995 if you’re looking to channel Theresa May in desert-khaki this Christmas.
In November, the editor of the American Spectator, R Emmett Tyrrell Jr, helpfully racistsplained racism to author Chimamanda Adichie on Newsnight. White people hating people who aren’t white is more complicated than racism, silly! And Donald Trump is, like, so not a racist. Adichie retorted: “I’m sorry, but, as a white man, you don’t get to define what racism is. You really don’t.” You really don’t.
Due to an unexpected shortage in the world supply of women, Glamour recently made Bono one of its 2016 women of the year. He accepted with grace and aplomb. A role model for little girls everywhere.
I was recently paying my bill at a restaurant and doing the awkward “was-there-service-included?” routine when the waiter interjected: “We don’t get any of that. In fact, that service charge makes it worse because it means people don’t ever tip us.” I gave the waiter the £10 I had in my pocket and vowed never to go back.
That day I was a customer, but on other days I am a waitress. The £10 tip I gave was more than a third of what I get paid for a standard four-hour shift. It is about 5% of the £212 set menu at Le Gavroche, Michel Roux Jr’s Michelin-starred restaurant that last week admitted to pocketing 100% of service charge as revenue.
As a customer that makes me angry because, like the HMRC and 61% of the public, I assume that service charge goes straight to staff. Why shouldn’t I? Service charge is added onto my bill separately, is optional, and is not taxable. Pocketing that charge, no matter how legal or “transparent”, feels like false advertising at best, and daylight robbery at worst.
But as somebody who is also a waitress, the idea of a customer thinking they are giving me a top-up because my salary isn’t already enough to live on, but that money instead going to the people who aren’t willing to pay me a decent wage, is painful.
As a waitress, I get paid £7.25 an hour, 5p more than the minimum wage. I get paid less than the minimum income standard, which is what the Joseph Rowntree Foundation suggests is required to “live to an adequate level”. It is £2.50 an hour less than the London living wage, the amount that I would need to earn to not be in-work poverty. In short, my wage as a waitress is not enough to provide me with a basic standard of living.
And my job is hard. On a busy day, I am juggling anywhere up to 30 orders in my head at a time. Alongside the manual effort of being on my feet for 12 hours, carrying crates and stacking plates, I am constantly having to make calculations. I have to know when each order will be in the kitchen, and how long that leaves me to clean up after the table of eight in the corner, all while understanding that table 44 wants to pay now, and if they do a runner it’ll be my wages it comes out of.
I’ll be watching the clock in case a customer comes in, a minute before closing, demanding to be seated – their reason being that they’ve only just finished work. They won’t realise that what I am doing is work too.
Of course, it’s all part of my job, and there are elements of my job that I love. I get to change my hours, which gives me the flexibility to do other stuff. Sometimes I don’t work Mondays. And when I work a double shift, I do it in the knowledge that I will be surrounded by people, which is sort of like seeing people in the evening anyway.
But while some romanticise the aspects of my work that they feel make it different to a “real” job with “real” concerns, I am in fact a real person. I need to make ends meet and, while my three-hour lunch break in the middle of a double shift might look like a luxury, in reality it is spent trying to avoid spending money because, as was once pointed out to me, a coffee is a third of my hourly wage.
That’s where tips come in. I wish we didn’t have to rely on them: they make our lives unstable and they turn a lot of what makes my job enjoyable into a crude, transactional performance. But the reality is that our employers don’t pay us enough, and customers are the people that make this career financially viable.
The worst thing about Roux’s decision last week, is by now promising to mark on bills and menus that no further payment was needed, while leaving it open, in theory, for customers to leave a tip, the move is likely to deter that option for many. In a world where our employers don’t pay us enough to live on, the least resturants can do is to allow waiting staff to benefit from the good grace of other humans.
Reports that a German-backed international school in Istanbul had scrapped Christmas festivities briefly caused outrage on Sunday and Monday, before the German foreign office said there had been a misunderstanding and that the school was allowed to teach Christmas traditions after all.
Set up in 1884, Istanbul Lisesi is a Turkish-German bilingual state school attended solely by Turkish students but partly backed by the German government. Thirty-five German teachers at the school are paid for by German taxpayers, but the headteacher is nominated directly by the education ministry in Ankara.
According to Spiegel Online, several teachers at the school said they had been told to no longer teach about German Christmas traditions in their classes, as well as being told to remove advent calendars from the classrooms.
“We don’t understand the surprising decision by the management of the Istanbul Lisesi,” said the German foreign ministry in an initial statement. “It is too bad that the good tradition of pre-Christmas intercultural exchanges at the school with a long German-Turkish tradition has been suspended. We are of course taking this up with our Turkish partners.”
The school denied the ban, which was first reported by the respected German news agency dpa and followed up by the media in Germany and abroad.
“The reports in German media about restrictions on Christmas festivities of German teachers do not reflect reality,” it said. “A concert was cancelled by the German teachers in question without explanation. There is no question of the school or its management placing an obstacle in its way or prohibiting it.”
Mustafa Yeneroğlu, an MP with the ruling AKP, also denied the claims, saying “such false reports do nothing for Turkey-Germany relations”.
A spokesperson for the German foreign ministry said on Monday afternoon that there was no “ban” on teaching Christmas at the school after all and that “hopefully all misunderstandings have been resolved”. By then, many German politicians had reacted with fury to the initial reports.
Julia Klöckner, a deputy chair of Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic party, said the incident was a sign of Turkey closing itself off from the outside world: “Those who want to restrain free thinking in this way are so ignorant, they must be capable of worse.”
Sevim Dağdelen, a politician with Germany’s Left party, told Tagesspiegel the government must “immediately summon the Turkish ambassador and send a note of protest to Ankara”.
The Greens’ education policy spokesman, Özcan Mutlu, said the reports were “simply shocking”.
Andreas Scheuer, the general secretary of the CSU – Merkel’s Bavarian allies – said the reports were “new proof that [President Recep Tayyip] Erdoğan’s Turkey is burning all bridges with Europe”.
Christmas is part of Germany, and that applies too for a German school abroad, Scheuer told the Funke regional media group.
Relations between Ankara and Berlin have been strained in the wake of the failed military coup in July, with Germany repeatedly expressing concern over the scope of a massive crackdown on Erdoğan’s opponents.
Developments in Turkey have a strong resonance in Germany, home to a 3-million-strong ethnic Turkish population, the legacy of a massive “guest worker” programme in the 1960s and 70s.
What should I wear to my boss’s Christmas party tomorrow night?
Zzzzzip! Record scratch! Sorry to interrupt, folks: normal service will be resumed next week, but this week we celebrate the festive season by going through the best and worst fashion moments of the year. Honestly, it’s what Jesus wanted us to do. He said so, right after he ticked off John the Baptist for his hopelessly passé robe. “Bias cut is soooo BC, John,” he said, as the two of them strolled along the river Jordan. Maybe. I might be less clear on my New Testament than my Vogue.
Let’s start with the downers. Well, it was a strange year. Breasts, for a start, we consigned to the bin. Vogue decreed that cleavage was “over”, and the adoring shots of Elizabeth Debicki’s frequently bra-strap-free back in The Night Manager seemed to confirm this. Rather sweetly, Vogue tried to pretend that theirs was a feminist declaration: “The tits will not be out for the lads. Nor anyone else, for that matter.” How marvellous! No longer will women suffer the tyranny of Eva Herzigova because a whole new body shape will be celebrated. Hurrah for the inclusivity of fashion! Go feminist fashion! Bog off, boobs!
Wait, what’s that noise? I think it might be a giant “EXCEPT” coming down the pipeline. EXCEPT perhaps it is because Vogue lives in an airless world populated only by the underfed and underweight but it seemed, rather sweetly, to have forgotten that not all women need Wonderbras to manage more than a C-cup. Breasts are not, in fact, just some novelty accessory we’ve been dabbling in, like Carrie necklaces or turbans. Going unsupported is not an option for some of us, at least not without giving ourselves two black eyes. So what to do for us, the unlucky few left with unfashionable breasts that can’t simply be slammed away in a drawer? One broadsheet had the answer: “How to dress when you hate your breasts,” read its headline. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is I believe what’s known as coming full circle.
We also hit peak athleisure, with the arrival of Chloé’s £1,000 tracksuit, a joke straight out of Nathan Barley. There was also peak squad, with various female celebrities clamouring on social media to show off their popularity, holidays and fat-free bodies, from Taylor Swift’s overly Instagrammed 4 July party to Cara Delevingne’s hyperbolically Instagrammed Maldives holiday. Confusingly, we also hit peak peak, so it is of utmost importance that someone come up with the 2017 word for something being over (“basic” is definitely over, as, incidentally, is over).
All right, quit your complaining already, woman! What has been good this year? Glad you ask, I reply to myself. Well, by some measure, my favourite fashion(ish) news story of the year was the undoubtedly totally true one about Kate Moss dumping her boyfriend, the great great grandson of Otto von Bismarck, after he switched off the Wi-Fi in Moss’s home during an argument, meaning her teenage daughter couldn’t use Snapchat and Instagram. You can imagine how that went down with a 14-year-old. Try to find one element in that story that doesn’t bring you some modicum of amusement. I know! You literally can’t! Anyway, young Von Bismarck and Moss are back together so not only is this story hilarious, it also has a happy ending. Whether Moss’s daughter feels the return of the Wi-Fi killer is a happy ending, however, is as yet unknown.
Otherwise, the year was really about two labels – Vetements and Gucci. My much-beloved colleague Jess Cartner-Morley wrote about Vetements’ year last week, so indulge me instead in my Gucci obsession. Put it this way: there are two kinds of fashion fans: the cool ones, and the ones who get distracted with funny things such as embroidered leopards and purple shoes. If you are cool, you like Vetements, and if you are more in the latter camp then you are a Gucci person and God bless you and Gucci’s designer, Alessandro Michele, for it. Fashion hasn’t been this fun since Marc Jacobs used to be fun.
The return of the 90s has been quite amusing-slash-traumatic for those of us who remember the 90s very, very clearly. There’s something about seeing a teenager in a slip dress and jumper to make you muse on your youth. And there’s nothing like realising said teenager wasn’t even alive in the 90s to make you realise how long ago the 90s were.
Finally, I’d like to end this retrospective column by bidding a sad farewell to a fashion item I very much hoped would be a part of all of our lives for the next four to eight years. I speak, of course, of Hillary Clinton’s pantsuits. Remember them? One in every colour! So cheering, so dependable. Never mind your politics (although you’re reading the Guardian, so who are we kidding here?), wouldn’t you rather be seeing those pantsuits on the news than that orange face and tonsorial monstrosity? My heart hurts just thinking about those pantsuits, to be honest. So forget about those Hadid sisters: 2016 was about the pantsuit. But not 2017, alas.
I’m a bit sick of people droning on about how governments and elites have failed to grasp the reasons for popular discontent. I suspect that they’ve known the reasons all along. They knew the discontent was coming, but they didn’t care – because they planned it.
Who but the elites decided that robots should take over human jobs wherever possible? They must have known that it would be like a gargantuan game of musical chairs: keep taking away the chairs and the people end up on the floor. And God forbid that a foreigner should end up with the last chair – the people would be outraged.
But that’s all part of the plan: provide a poor education for the people so that they can’t think very well for themselves, don’t build enough houses, then tell the indigenous residents that foreigners are to blame for stealing their work and homes, are terrorists, or health tourists, or lazy and peculiar, and they’ll believe you, even if you tell them huge porkies, because they’re exhausted, frazzled and need someone to blame – and you, as rulers, are meant to know what you’re talking about.
And, by the time the truth comes out, limping along behind, the lies will have done their work and it will be win-win for you lot in charge, because now that you’ve got so many people hating foreigners, you can more easily turn away refugees who try to escape from appalling wars (which you probably helped to cause) because you’ve now got fear and xenophobia well established. Then you can say: “The public want their country back,” as if it’s everyone else’s fault and you can only do what your constituents ask you to do.
Best of all for you elites, the people will be so befuddled by lies and so busy squabbling among themselves that they won’t even mind if you rule them from a castle, ivory tower or golden baroque-rococo palace.
But I hope, with all my heart, that very soon your cover will be blown and we will have happier years in the future.
What is a dog’s favourite television programme? Sadly for Christmas crackers everywhere, it’s not likely to be Woof Hall. According to the commendable work of scientists at the University of Lancashire, dogs prefer watching Coronation Street to anything else, including clips of other dogs playing.
The researchers placed two labradors in a controlled, home-like environment and showed them 12 clips of 20 seconds each. They then collated the responses, looking at attention times and at which of the three screens the dogs looked. In order to replicate the science, I also created a controlled environment and let my whippet lie on the sofa with me while I watched television.
My experiment suggested that she is a big fan of Planet Earth II, particularly when birds feature, and especially that bit in the final episode where the langurs do a simian version of parkour across the rooftops of Jodhpur. Continuing our family tradition of enjoying drunk nanas falling over at weddings and sunburned dads jumping into – and breaking – paddling pools, she is also a big fan of You’ve Been Framed. She briefly paid attention to Netflix’s new show The OA, but only when Steve’s dog barked at Prairie. She would rather sleep through The Young Pope.
The University of Lancashire study suggested that, ultimately, dogs simply are not as interested in watching stuff as they are in eating, sleeping and playing. But I spoke to several dog owners who disagree: “She watches EastEnders with me but I don’t think she truly appreciates it.” “Really likes the cricket.” “Wasn’t allowed to watch Springwatch because he went so berserk.” “I once made her a Barcelona kit to wear while watching the Champions’ League final.”
Furthermore, my study concluded that in no way are dogs’ viewing habits connected to the fact that watching stuff involves lying on warm humans on a comfortable sofa.
Zsa Zsa Gabor, who has died at 99, isn’t really being remembered for her film roles, which were minor. Instead, she is being celebrated now for one major performance. Being Zsa Zsa Gabor. She created the role, and she lived it, playing it to perfection. This Hungarian woman – who lost her virginity at 15 to Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey – rose from beauty queen to actor, then became a TV personality and full-time celebrity.
In the staid 1940s and then 50s, Zsa Zsa, a green-eyed blonde, became a hugely entertaining presence, poured into extravagant gowns accessorised with diamonds, furs, tiny dogs and the exaggerated “Dahlink” she used to address everyone. It was her lifestyle rather than any talent that kept her in the public eye. Of course, people were interested in her nine marriages but it was actually her wit and cleverness that kept the show on the road.
Zsa Zsa was one of the first people to be famous for being famous, ushering in the new era of celebrity. To call her a proto-Kardashian though is to underestimate her charm and her stamina. My mother and her friends loved Zsa Zsa because at a time when women were meant to be passive and grateful to be married at all, Zsa Zsa was always talking about marrying for money rather than romance: “Diamonds are a girl’s best friend and dogs are a man’s best friend. Now you know which sex has more sense.” She married nine times and divorced seven. “I’m a great housekeeper,” she quipped. “Every time I get a divorce, I keep the house.”
Her excessiveness was part of her “brand”. Flaunting conspicuous consumption, dripping with jewels, her image was that of a woman who knew how to get what she wanted. And before the 1960s and the sexual revolution, she was open about liking sex. Her lovers included Sean Connery and Frank Sinatra, and she claimed to have spurned the advances of John F Kennedy, Elvis Presley, John Huston and Henry Fonda. Greta Garbo once kissed her “straight on the mouth,” she said. “And I couldn’t help kissing back because she was so overwhelmingly strong and beautiful.” When asked how many husbands she had had, she used to say: “You mean other than my own?”
Although her actual husbands included the actor George Sanders and the hotelier Conrad Hilton, she lived in a world of self-parody, gossip and knowingness about the lifestyles of the rich and famous. She was adored rather than resented because she was always tipping us a wink.
Beneath the glamour, as with so many of these female stars, we now sense the power, control, and sheer stamina they needed to keep going. Zsa Zsa was a woman who could laugh at herself and her embodiment of that special kind of female camp; she was her own special creation. In her heyday, if she turned up at a premiere, she would get more attention than the stars of the film. She certainly knew how to work it, as they say, even proffering advice to other women in books that included How to Catch a Man, How to Keep a Man, How to Get Rid of a Man.
Gabor once described herself as unconventional and true to herself. Therein lay her fabulousness. She was arch about both love and money. She was acerbic, flamboyant, she kicked against tradition and sometimes won. Like many women of her generation she understood that femininity is always a performance, and she performed it to the hilt. She was always winning, never a victim. As camp as Christmas, her seeming frivolity hid the sharpness and strength that made her name.
Sometimes, after I publish a story, I’ll receive a couple of emails from readers who want to share their thoughts. But one project I worked on this year with Mae Ryan, a four-part video series called Vagina Dispatches, prompted hundreds of you to get in touch.
One episode in particular got people writing to us: Stopping Periods. There were very different reactions to it, but one message we received often was that the video left some questions unanswered.
We really wanted to respond to your questions and concerns (though the series is supposed to be fun to watch, it’s also supposed to be informative since so many of us with vaginas don’t know enough about them), so we put your questions to Dr Deborah Ottenheimer, a New York-based gynecologist with 20 years of medical experience and a human rights activist.
DO: It’s true that biologically, women used to have many children starting quite early in life. Social evolution has changed that scenario for many of us, particularly in the economic “north”. It is absolutely true that women who are constantly either pregnant or nursing don’t have their periods as often.
But I’m not sure that the fact that many of us choose not to live that way means that our periods are not natural. It just means that social evolution moves faster (or differently) than biological evolution.
DO: The key to checking to see if there is something to be concerned about is to use a period tracker (or be old-fashioned and plot it on your calendar). That helps to document whether a change is actually just a new monthly pattern or whether there really is something weird going on.
Signs to look out for that need evaluation by a medical provider are:
DO: The range of normal is large. A normal cycle length can range from 21-45 days. What we look for is a fairly regular period pattern in a single woman; a woman who has her period after 21 days one month, 45 days the next, and 22 the next needs to be checked out. A woman who has her periods every 21-23 days is fine, as is a woman who has her period every 42-45 days. On average, a woman’s period should last no more than 7 days. Some women have a moderate amount of bleeding every day; others have heavy bleeding one or two days, and then spotting for a few more. Both are OK. It’s worth noting that women’s periods change with age. Often women will see a real pattern emerge around 22-25 years old. Changes seem to happen again around 30 and again in our 40s and finally as we move towards menopause. Some women will develop spotting at the time of ovulation for a few months or years. That’s OK.
DO: Some women prefer to have a monthly period, while others do not. Both are OK. Many women with menstrual problems like excessive bleeding or pain, or endometriosis, or menstrual migraines or menstrual psychosis, are helped tremendously by skipping their periods.
What is not OK is to not have periods when you are not on some sort of hormonal contraceptive. Generally, we recommend seeking the advice of a medical practitioner if more than three months have gone by with no period. That may indicate some sort of illness. It can also lead to the abnormal buildup of the uterine lining and, occasionally, that can lead to endometrial cancer.
Women who have a chronic illness, a hormonal imbalance, or severe eating disorders (to name a few) will often have disordered periods. When they go to the doctor/medical practitioner with that symptom, the underlying problem can be searched for.
DO: A whole generation of medical providers in America was taught that IUDs caused all sorts of terrible things. They don’t, and they never did as a group. Just one, the Dalkon Shield, was bad. About 5%-10% of women will expel their IUD – that is to say, their uterus will push it out. Usually, you know because there will be abnormal cramping/bleeding or a partner may feel the plastic shaft during intercourse/fingering. Those women who do expel the device can still have another one placed. There is about a 15% risk of expulsion.
The risk of uterine perforation (punching through) with IUD placement is real, but rare. Situations in which it is a little more common include women who are immediately post-partum (ie have just had a baby) or who have multiple fibroids. In 20 years of practice, I have placed literally thousands of IUDs and had only one woman with a perforation.
Modern IUDs do not cause infertility.
DO: Endometriosis is a state in which the lining of the uterus (called the endometrium) grows outside of the uterus. There are a lot of theories about why this might happen but in fact, no one knows the reason behind it.
Bleeding into the pelvic/abdominal cavity is quite painful. It also causes scarring and chronic inflammation. As a result, longstanding endometriosis can cause scarring of the tubes and lead to infertility. The scarring can also lead to bowel obstruction and chronic pelvic pain in severe cases. The symptoms vary a lot in severity and location depending on how bad the disease is. Treatment ranges from stopping your period – with the pill, Depo-Provera or Mirena IUD – to surgery.
DO: PCOS is a very common endocrine disorder arising primarily from insulin resistance/poor metabolism of glucose (so it’s a risk factor for diabetes as well). The resistance to insulin leads, through a series of chemical reactions, to an excess of testosterone.
It’s important to remember that it’s called a “syndrome”, not a disease, to emphasize the fact that there is a whole range of severity out there. Not every woman presents in the same way. The diagnosis is made when a woman has two of the following three signs/symptoms: infrequent or absent periods; elevated testosterone on a blood test or physical findings of elevated testosterone; and/or polycystic ovaries on ultrasound.
PCOS manifests itself through signs of elevated testosterone like acne, excess hair growth in places women don’t expect to get hair, and male pattern baldness. Irregular or absent periods are also common. Many women with PCOS have great difficulty losing weight as well.
DO: I have two sons, a male cat, and a husband at home but if I had a cis girl, this would be close to what I would want to say:
Having your period can be inconvenient at times, but it is just how we are built. Having sex with your period is OK too. That women are shamed and seen as unclean when they have their menses makes me furious. Women are the force that allows our species to continue. Without monthly bleeding, there would be no future for humanity. End of story. How men (and religion) have turned that on its head and made women feel badly for their bleeding is beyond me. We should be honored for it.
When is a cape just a cape? Rarely, as proven by Ben Mendelsohn’s baddie in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story. In his role as Director Orson Krennic, a middle-management imperial lackey, he has turned the off-white cape into a real takeaway from the new film.
It’s worth restating the obvious at this point: Star Wars bad guys usually opt for black. But, rather than blindsiding us with its political correctness, the white cape is actually a triple power move. The colour is Cornforth White from Farrow & Ball, a mid-tone, off-white shade, which was the colour of 2016 for people in positions of power. It’s what Hillary Clinton chose for her final-debate pantsuit, is a similar shade to Melania Trump’s jumpsuit worn to her husband’s victory speech and is Michelle Obama’s favourite dress colour. Also, capes are the root of shoulder-robing, that peculiar frow-friendly trend for wearing your coat on your shoulders, leaving your hands free to text or wield the lanyard to the Death Star. And they have been a consistent coat trend for the past five seasons, worn by Solange to her 2014 wedding, and most recently seen on the Gareth Pugh catwalk. The giveaway here is that the model wore sunglasses indoors while modelling.
As Mendelsohn has explained, it is significant as a performance tool as well as a prop: “It gives you a dignity and an uprightness that you might not have had otherwise. It’s the sign of a great costume.”
A white Christmas is looking unlikely, according to forecasters who predict 2016 will end with a spell of unsettled but mild weather.
The festive season will probably pass without snowfall, while daytime temperatures are expected to stay above freezing. As 25 December approaches, people across the UK should expect wetter and windier conditions, but are unlikely to need a sleigh.
A Met Office spokesman said: “It’s relatively a long distance away still, so obviously there’s a fair amount of uncertainty. But it’s looking like it will probably be relatively mild, so unlikely to see much of a white Christmas.”
He said there may be local variations, with the possibility of snow on mountains in Scotland, and that while overnight temperatures could drop below freezing in some places, it will remain mild during the day.
The Met Office outlook for the next six to 30 days in the UK suggests Friday will start with local frost and some patchy fog in the south, but will turn unsettled from the west through the day.
“This will herald a changeable and at times very unsettled spell of weather as we move through the Christmas period and towards new year.
“A succession of deep Atlantic depressions will bring bands of heavy rain east across all parts, although sheltered eastern and south-eastern areas should see some reasonable drier interludes too.
“Winds will often be strong, with periods of gales, and the potential for some stormy conditions at times in the north-west,” the Met Office website says.
Now that it’s less than a week to the big day, let’s talk Christmas Day runs. What’s your tradition? The other day I was chatting with someone, explaining that myself and the other half usually go for a longish, rambly run together before picking up the breakfast croissants and pain au choc treats. “Blimey” she said, “Don’t you even take Christmas Day off?” I was a bit nonplussed, before I realised that she meant that for her, running was simply a chore - and if there’s one day you don’t do chores, it’s Christmas Day.
But if you love running, why wouldn’t you do it on the one day of the year where you are almost guaranteed no traffic, good company, smiley faces (yes, even in London!) and a vast amount of food later on? It’s pretty much my favourite run of the year. Though I admit that I may be alone when it comes to my other personal tradition of a truly evil track session on Christmas Eve morning ...
But back to the weekend that’s just gone. Any PBs to report? My long run moved to Saturday due to party-hosting duties (happy birthday today to my very own junior parkrunner!) and I’ll say this for getting 20 miles out of the way by Saturday lunchtime - it gives you plenty of time to eat recovery cake ...
Share your own tales of weekend triumphs and woes - and plans for Christmas Day running - below the line as always.
Because he would not abandon the flock for a lost sheep
after the others had bedded down for the night,
he turned back, searched the thickets and gullies.
Sleepless, while the flock dozed in the morning mist
he searched the pastures up ahead. Winter nearing,
our wool heavy with brambles, ropes of muddy ice,
he did not abandon the lost sheep, even when the snows came.
Still, I knew there was only a thin line
between the good shepherd and the butcher.
How many lambs had put their heads between the shepherd’s knees,
closed their eyes, offering their neck to the knife?
Familiar – the quick thuds of the club doing its work.
More than once at night I saw the halo coming.
I ran like a deer and hid among rocks,
or I crawled under a bush, my heart in thorns.
During the day I lived my life in clover
watching out for the halo.
I swore on the day the good shepherd catches hold,
trying to wrestle me to the ground and bind my feet,
I will buck like a ram and bite like a wolf,
although I taste the famous blood
I will break loose! I will race under the gates of heaven,
back to the mortal fields, my flock, my stubbled grass and mud.
The scenes in the windows of 2016’s Advent calendar seem particularly dark and bloody. As usual, we rush for the friendly binary oppositions, and line up the butchers versus the dwindling breed of good shepherds. But what if good shepherd and butcher are one and the same person?
For this week’s poem, an old parable transformed into wiser truth and timelier warning, we’re revisiting the work of Stanley Moss whose Almost Complete Poems will be published in January. Moss, born in 1925, continues to write poems that combine wit, imagination, humane politics and a spiritual vision innocent of creed and dogma. In The Good Shepherd, originally published in his 2003 collection, A History of Color, it’s not the unrepentant sinner we should fear, but the unrepentant saint.
Jesus recounted the parable of the good shepherd in Luke 15: 3-7. It was his response to a scolding from the pious for his association with “publicans and sinners”. The shepherd in the parable is no Bo-Peep (“leave them alone, and they’ll come home”, the nursery rhyme advises). He abandons, at least temporarily, the 99 well-behaved sheep of his flock so as to search out the single one that has strayed. The lost sheep represents the sinner, of course, and the good shepherd, God. The parable is intended to correct the self-righteous, and cheer the outsiders with a vision of God’s magnanimity. But a sheep’s-eye view might regard the good shepherd as a little obsessed.
It’s in the penultimate line of the first of the three stanzas that the use of the possessive plural pronoun “our” signals the narrator’s identity. It’s not just any sheep, either; it’s the lost sheep, although we might not realise this until the next stanza.
A calm, hexameter rhythm and measured tone at first prevail. The sheep even seems coolly approving. Line seven echoes and amplifies line one, a reflection on the shepherd’s spotless record. The poem gives us realism as well as the fantasy of an eloquent sheep, vividly evoking the grainy discomfort of the weatherbeaten animals, “our wool heavy with brambles, ropes of muddy ice”. Poor, patient sheep, huddling together for comfort while the shepherd heads out into the blizzard, we think.
In the second stanza, the tone changes: it’s no longer that of a calm public utterance. The voice is more agitated and colloquial. “Still, I knew there was only a thin line / between the good shepherd and the butcher.” It’s a fair point, but a surprising one and it marks the moment at which the poem splits decisively from the Bible story. When we reach the statement, “More than once at night I saw the halo coming”, we know for sure: this sheep is on the run. And we taste a little of its fear.
From the stray sheep’s point of view, the shepherd has an ulterior motive, caring for the flock only to reduce it to profitability. The lambs submit bravely: the death is administered almost lovingly, but it’s still death. The poem gives us both the knife and the club – and it notes that the “quick thuds of the club doing its work” are “familiar”. This implies other victims, closer in time and place – civilians caught in some warzone, perhaps, the “thuds” those that rain down from the sky, or people otherwise brutalised and rendered into things. So this clever sheep has got out of the way, and intends to stay out, relishing the freedom but also constantly “watching out for the halo”.
The effect of this synecdoche is both sinister and comic. Our sheep has a certain sense of humour. But the dread of the pursuing “halo” is real and sharp, registered in shorter lines and quicker sentence-bursts. When the creature crawls under a bush, and tells us his/her heart is “in thorns”, there is no doubt of the analogy being drawn. It’s not the good shepherd who is Christlike, but the rebel sheep.
The last stanza declares the intention to fight fiercely, “taste the famous blood” (ie Christ’s), break loose and return to freedom. The rhythm is urgent, kicking and biting until the escape into expansive joy at the end. The sheep’s salvation would be its death. “I will race under the gates of heaven, / back to the mortal fields, my flock, my stubbled grass and mud.” Earth, not heaven, is all it desires.
The problem the poem discerns is one at the heart of the great religions. Their conventional message, even when the preacher is as radical and refreshing as Christ, always promotes the same ultimate goal, insisting that the true life is not of this world. The Christian God miraculously becomes incarnate at Christmas, and shares our mortality, but the intention still is to lead us to that other, immortal life. Heaven’s unimaginable perfection and stasis are the true creation.
The sheep in The Good Shepherd takes the pragmatic view. Heaven is here on earth. It can be harsh, stubbly and muddy, brambly and icy as well as clover-sweet, but it’s what we have. Haloes are dangerous when they tell us otherwise. At best, the good shepherd will kill you humanely and send you to market. Watch your wool. Have a happy Christmas!
I’ll never know how many people liked this article, shared it or found it irrelevant, anti-progressive or ironic. Nor will I get to read comments about my personal hygiene, or suggesting that a luddite like me needs to embrace industrialism. And that is no bad thing, for the moment writing becomes a popularity contest – rewarding sensationalism, groupthink and deceit over honest exploration of complex matters – people and places lose, and those who need to be held to account win. Win, that is, for a shortsighted moment.
The reason I won’t see any web reaction is because I live in a cabin – built with spruce, oak, hands, straw, Douglas fir, stubbornness, earth and knees – without electricity or so-called modern conveniences (I’ve never found doing the work to buy and maintain them particularly convenient).
From Wednesday, I’m rejecting the world of complex technology entirely. That means no laptop, no internet, no phone, no washing machine, no tapped water, no gas, no fridge, no television or electronic music; no anything requiring the copper-mining, oil-rigging, plastics-manufacturing essential to the production of a single toaster or solar photovoltaic system.
Having already rejected these industrial-scale, complex technologies, I intend to move fully towards what is pejoratively called primitive technology. Insofar as engaging with civilisation allows, I’m also trying to resist the modern domination of what Jay Griffiths, in Pip Pip, calls clock time – and failing daily.
That probably sounds like I’ve given up a lot of stuff. But while I intend to be clear and honest about the difficulties involved over the coming months, especially in the digital age, I’m just as fascinated in exploring what lessons about life – myself, society, the natural world – I might learn; perhaps things my cyborg-mind cannot yet imagine. That was my experience of living without money for three fine years.
Rejecting technologies that my generation considers to be the basic necessities of life wasn’t done on a thoughtless whim. I already miss not being able to pick up the phone and talk to my parents. Writing is different, my pencil unaided by both copy-and-paste and the easy delete, two word-processing functions reflective of a generic, transient and whimsical culture; and it has been a while since the media and publishing worlds worked by snail mail.
I decided to eschew complex technology for two reasons. The first was that I found myself happier away from screens and the relentless communication they generate, and instead living intimately with my locale. The second, more important, was the realisation that technology destroys, in more ways than one.
It destroys our relationship with the natural world. It first separates us from nature, while simultaneously converting life into the cash that oils consumerist society. Not only does it enable us to destroy habitat efficiently, over time this separation has led us to valuing the natural world less, meaning we protect and care for it less. By way of this vicious technological cycle, we are consciously causing the sixth mass extinction of species.
Technology destroys places. Aside from the oceans, rivers, topsoil, forests, mountains and meadows, it helps us massacre and pollute with ever-improving precision and speed, its complex set of cogs quickly spreads us out all over the world, safe in the knowledge that we can stay in touch with loved ones via technologies that offer what is really only a toxic substitute for real connection and time together. It is badly injuring, perhaps fatally, rural communities, luring their youth into industrial and financial centres – cities – whose existence is premised, as the American writer and environmentalist Wendell Berry said, on the devastation of some other far-flung place, which consumers don’t have to look at thanks to the out-of-sight, out-of-mind distance afforded by technology.
When I walk to the spring to collect water in the morning I meet neighbours and we talk. Yes, it takes time, something I found frustrating at first, but slowness only became a bad thing when time became money. Walking four miles to the post office to send my letters takes time too, but it ties me to people and place in a way that sitting in my bedroom on my own, writing endless emails, could never do.
Technology destroys people. We’re already cyborgs (pacemakers, hearing aids) of a sort, and are well on our way to the type of Big Brother dystopia of the techno-utopians. And look at the state of us. Our toxic, sedentary lifestyles are causing industrial-scale afflictions of cancer, mental illness, obesity, heart disease, auto-immune disorders and food intolerances, along with those slow killers, loneliness, clock-watching and meaninglessness. We seem to spend more time watching porn than we do making love, relationships are breaking down because we stare into screens instead of eyes, while social media are making us antisocial.
Living without complex technology has its own difficulties, especially for people like me who were never initiated into those ways. But already I much prefer it. Instead of making a living to pay bills, I make living my life. Contrary to expectation, my biggest issue is not being bored, but how to do all the things I’d love to do. Of course hand-washing your clothes can be a pain sometimes, but that minor inconvenience is hardly worth destroying the natural world over.
Well-intentioned friends often try to convince me to go off-grid, but in using batteries, electrical cables and photovoltaic panels (as I once did), I would still be connected, by a peculiar sort of invisible cable, to the global network of quarries, factories, courtrooms, mines, financial institutions, bureaucracies, armies, transport networks and workers needed to produce such things. They also ask me to stay on social media to speak out about the technology issue, but I say I’m denouncing complex technology simply by renouncing it. My culture made a Faustian pact, on my behalf, with those devilish tyrants Speed, Numbers, Homogeneity, Efficiency and Schedules, and now I’m telling the devil I want my soul back.
My life has its fair share of irony, and it can look hypocritical. Despite originally writing these words (a technology) with a pencil (a technology) in a hand-crafted cabin (a technology), the irony of this being an online blog is not lost on me. That is my compromise for now, for if you want to contribute to a healthier society, compromise can be a healthy thing if you know your boundaries. Being a hypocrite is always my highest ideal, as it means I’ve set higher standards for myself to strive for than I’m achieving at any one moment.
We know that, at the very least, some technologies are harming our natural world, our societies and, ultimately, ourselves. Therefore we can recognise the need to reject some technologies. If we’re to avoid technological extremism we’re going to have to draw a line in the sand somewhere. I’ve drawn mine, and I will only move it in the direction of my home.
• Get in touch with Mark here or in the comments below, a selection of which will be posted to him
 Sheila and John Gill began hanging decorations and fixing thousands of lights over the August bank holiday. The lights, which completely cover their house and garden, will stay switched on between 4pm and 8pm each day until 31 December
The former MasterChef host Michel Roux Jr has begun reimbursing staff who were paid less than the legal minimum wage at his £212-a-head Mayfair restaurant.
Current and former chefs at Le Gavroche are in line for payments running to thousands of pounds each after a Guardian investigation last month exposed Roux for paying kitchen staff, who worked up to 68 hours a week, as little as £5.50 an hour. The wages worked out at well below the £7.20 legal minimum for people aged over 24.
Roux has now written personally to former chefs apologising for their underpayment and promising to make up shortfalls in their pay. He has also sent four-figure cheques to others, which are arriving just in time to fund an upgrade from Christmas Day cava to champagne for some of his hard-pressed former workers.
Roux wrote: “It has been brought to my attention that some ex-staff may have been underpaid and this may affect you. If this is the case then please accept my apologies and reassurance that this was not intentional.” He asked former staff to “confirm any shortfall that may be due”.
A spokeswoman confirmed that letters had been sent out and said: “Of the people he has been in contact with in the kitchen team, he will settle with everybody who feels they have a legitimate claim and he will honour it.” Roux now faces a bill running into tens of thousands of pounds. One former chef told the Guardian he will tell Roux he is owed close to £8,000.
Another former chef quoted from Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol in describing Roux’s repayments as “a fair, even handed, noble adjustment of things”. “But,” he said, “it was an adjustment of an unfair, underhanded and ignoble practice in the first place and it was forced. These issues will persist in the restaurant industry unless they are challenged by staff and the public.
“It is not OK. Chefs and waiters should expect to be paid at least that required by law and customers should be confident staff are well treated.”
The move came exactly a month after Le Gavroche chefs blew the whistle on their low pay. They revealed that while they were preparing dishes such as the £60.80 butter-poached lobster with almonds, peas and a bisque sauce for guests including Paul McCartney, Adele and the Queen, they were working between 62 and 68 hours a week for £375 before tax.
It was described as “simply not acceptable” by the Sustainable Restaurant Association, led by rival Michelin-starred chef Raymond Blanc. One former chef at the restaurant said that while Roux was in many ways a supportive employer, the pay was “disgusting”.
Roux’s friends, meanwhile, rallied to support him. They included the restaurant critic Jay Rayner, who said that while underpayment of the minimum wage was wrong, Roux was “not quite the anti-Christ” and was “a good employer”. Rayner said the problem of underpayment in the restaurant industry was “systemic”.
Roux had said that despite being hands-on at the two-Michelin star restaurant, he had not noticed the long hours some of his kitchen staff were working and said “in no way was it done intentionally”.
Some chefs are understood to have been wary of approaching Roux directly to ask for missing pay for fear that such a move could affect their career prospects. Roux is an influential figure in the UK restaurant industry, with numerous former Gavroche chefs running top kitchens. They include Gordon Ramsay, Marco Pierre White and Marcus Wareing. But Roux appeared to head off any such fears, saying requests for back pay would be handled confidentially by his restaurant’s payroll department.
“I think it is brilliant he has done this,” said one former chef who is preparing to lodge a substantial request for back pay. “It would be nice if other restaurants did the same, as I am sure many others are paying beneath the legal minimum.”
Underpayment of the minimum wage is punishable by a fine levied by HMRC, and last night Frank Field MP, chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions select committee, called on Theresa May to order HMRC to investigate Le Gavroche.
“What better opportunity for the prime minister to offer low-paid workers some Christmas cheer?” said Field. “If Mrs May were to ask HMRC to identify all of the staff who were underpaid by Le Gavroche, and order that they be repaid their lost earnings, other high-end restaurants might think twice before ripping off their own staff.”
Last week the Guardian also revealed that Le Gavroche has been keeping all the discretionary 13% service charge it levies on customers bills and does not distribute it to staff on top of their wages. Roux responded by abolishing the charge and increasing prices by 13%. He said this would clear up any ambiguity about what the service charge was for.
On Friday he tweeted: “Never touched tips in my life, every penny goes to staff without anything withheld. All SC [service charge] goes to wages, not a penny creamed off either.” He recently changed his Twitter avatar to an image of one chef punching another.
His tweet appeared to foster more confusion, with several people saying service charges shouldn’t be used to pay wages. Roux defines tips as cash or card payments over and above service charge which he has treated as restaurant “revenue”.
Sensorwake, £100
Sensorwake is an intriguing alarm clock that wakes you not with sound, but with an aroma of your choice (as long as your choice is croissant, espresso or the seaside). The reusable capsules and heatless, dry-air diffusion fill a room with scent in two minutes. I don’t know about yours, but when my body has been promised a croissant it doesn’t receive, it shuts down. Right down. However, I hate audio alarms – I prefer a vibrating bracelet. This could be a interesting sensual addition. There’s scope to add a vastly greater array of scents. My favourite smells are old books and fresh sweat, but not together.
Hangover cup, £8
Those who have gone all out, travelled fully downtown, got blotto in the grotto, may be more in need of the hangover cup. Warning: this is not a product that suggests quiet dignity. It looks like it may have come from a vet’s office. It holds a litre of water, and it’s spill-proof, spouted and double-handled, so it can be fully inverted for drinking on the horizontal. It doesn’t feel great to be an adult who drinks out of a sippy cup because they can’t hold their Breezers, but reflecting on your immature choices is what January is for, right? 1 January of never.
Molecular gastronomy kit, £40 
There’s something sad and sweet about a cook who recently learned foaming technique and is now forcing Bovril suds with deconstructed toast on everyone. But that’s me, now that I own this box of frogs. I love the – let’s be frank – wankery of molecular gastronomy. The molecular gastronomy kit includes syringes, pipettes and silicone tubes, plus sachets of natural texturising agents, such as agar-agar and calcium lactate, and a DVD of 50 recipes. Once you’ve got a handle on spherification, emulsification and gelification, you can play around with recipes such as yoghurt ravioli, lemon clouds and balsamic pearls, like a sorcerer whipping up a fantasia. To me, the kit and its techniques are alien and wondrous – a sort of ET foam home, if you like.
Tog knives, from £100 
I have said – quietly, because it undermines this entire column – that a good knife is the only kitchen gadget one needs.* Tog knives are good – and they let you pretend to be an enigmatic assassin, AKA my favourite hobby. They’re created by a British designer, but hand-forged in Japan, based on the folded construction of Samurai swords, incorporating 21 layers of stainless steel and copper. The knives are strong and incredibly sharp – they bisect tomatoes as if they were made of hummus. The antimicrobial copper laminae resemble geological strata in the blade, while the handle is made of a hardwood alternative called Kebony, which is funny and beautiful to look at. They’re breathtakingly expensive, but ideal for filleting fish, vegetables and enemies.
* In addition to a powerful blender and an apron with joke abs on it.
Nescafé Dolce Gusto Eclipse coffee machine, £170 
Nescafé’s advert campaign for their new range of pod-coffee machines may have shot itself in the foot, as it features colossal self-regardist will.i.am remixing soul classic Sitting on the Dock of the Bay to banal effect. But let’s not judge their unwise alliances – let’s judge the strange shape of their machines. The Eclipse looks like a starship had relations with a doughnut and returned to earth to dispense hot drinks. Upon touch-activation, the device breaks its perfect circle smoothly, like an ouroboros taking time out from infinity to spew macchiato from its neck. There are capsules for café au lait, espresso caramel and Marrakech tea, among others; the ones I tasted tasted good. The airy digital controls will alienate some and excite others. If you’re down with pod coffee and have one of those brushed-metal kitchens out of Fifty Shades of Grey, prepare to whip yourself into a frenzy. If you own a tea shop in the Cotswolds, don’t.
Libratone Q Adapt on-ear headphones, £219
Whenever I host a party, there invariably comes a tipping point at which I wish everyone in my house were gone. It’s a problem compounded at Christmas, when one’s home is full of undesirables and children. I have three life-changing words for you, or two including the hyphen: noise-cancelling headphones. Libratone’s Q Adapt are the most elegant I’ve tried, with four ANC (active noise-cancellation) settings and clever, touch-sensitive cans that let you skip tracks, adjust the volume and take calls. They even know when you’ve taken them off, automatically pausing and resuming music. Let the mental duvet descend, my friends.
Yester home nutcracker, £35
If the option of domestic vigilantism is still important to you, keep this premium nut cracker/shell catcher on hand. It’s a cast-iron vice that could crush a diamond, let alone a macadamia. Made by delightfully named ironmongery Yester Home, it’s the heaviest thing in my house right now.
Amano tongue scraper, £10 
What to get the man or woman who has everything? How about the rank insinuation that they have halitosis? I like this product’s commitment to being disgusting. The press release for the Amano describes the tongue as a deep-pile carpet of bacterial debris, and the proposed benefits of tongue scraping include a deeper appreciation of flavour, as well as the reduction of “STDs residing on the tongue”. (Other sexual health products are available, thank God.) Their models resemble artistic hand-strengtheners, with patterned handles, a triumphant sweep of steel and names including Ophelia Rising and Savile Row. Lord love ’em, they’re as classy as the concept will allow.
Chef’n Twist’N Sprout, £8
The brussels sprout stripper is another gadget that, as one friend accurately assessed, has been specially designed to have no transferable uses. But he found it worked well, hulling brussels’ and opening up their leaves for a better boil. What’s most charming, though, is the name: Twist’N Sprout. While food is the most direct way to my heart, wordplay definitely opens the back door. “Twist to trim and core,” reads the packet, like a pilates instructor for miniature cabbages. If you’re in need of a gift that says: “I put very little thought into this,” in addition to: “Now make my dinner,” this is your guy. Also, screw you. Happy Christmas!
Recommended by Anne Fine, author of Madame Doubtfire, Goggle Eyes and Flour Babies
The Frog and Toad books are perfect gifts. Children of three to five adore these wry, intelligent and gentle stories about two very different friends. Frog is patient and modest. Toad is not. But together they face the problems any child will recognise: ice‑creams that melt too fast, an overpowering inability to get out of bed, lost buttons, failure of will power, and all the myriad misunderstandings, anxieties and triumphs of small busy lives.
The illustrations are a restful, greeny-brown delight. There’s nothing brash and cartoony about these stories. Though written as simply as fables, the wry humour makes them appeal to a wide age range. No adult I know ever tires of reading them aloud. I’ve seen grown men reduced to tears of laughter by Frog and Toad’s confusions.
It’s an old-fashioned adventure story, but set in a modern London estate. The adventure takes place over one night, when the characters go on a mission to the other side of the city. It’s set against the backdrop of a riot – people are looting shops and the town centre is a no-go area. Throughout the book there’s a threat of violence, and it deals with topics such as sexting, which aren’t very well represented in the usual books on the GCSE syllabus. The dialogue and conversations between characters are so vibrant – I have no idea if that’s how young people talk on estates in London, but it felt authentic. I was blown away by one of my pupils’ responses to the book – he went away and made his mum order the earlier story, Liccle Bit. He hadn’t read a book for five years.
Recommended by Julia Donaldson, author of The Gruffalo, Room on the Broom and Christmas with Princess Mirror-Belle
E Nesbit was the inventor of the modern children’s adventure story. Less well known than Five Children and It or The Railway Children, this to my mind is her most imaginative book. Three siblings discover a secret tunnel that leads them to what they believe is an enchanted castle, though its princess, Mabel, is just as ordinary as they are, despite possessing a ring that can make you invisible.
The most powerful part of this book is when some creatures called the Ugly-Wuglies, whom the children make out of coathangers and umbrellas and broomsticks, come to life. They have no roofs to their mouths, so when they speak, “Can you recommend me to a good hotel?” comes out as “Aa oo re o me me oo a oo ho el?” It is terrifying yet funny at the same time.
Recommended by Lucy Worsley, historian, broadcaster and author of Eliza Rose, a novel about the Tudor Court for readers of 11 and over
A classic bit of historical children’s fiction. I’m amazed when I reread it just how closely she followed the Tudor sources. The story starts with a christening procession that saw the future queen watching her baby brother, Edward VI, being taken by torchlight through the galleries of the palace to the ceremony in the Chapel Royal. It was just one of Plaidy’s many historical books with young female protagonists that were catnip to an introverted nine-year-old like me. My own copy, with its picture of Hampton Court Palace on the cover, is undoubtedly one of the reasons I’ve ended up working there as chief curator.
This is a lyrical picture book where we follow a young girl who takes a little boy on an adventure through books. It’s about how fiction opens our minds and opens doors to other places. There are beautiful illustrations combined with extracts from classic literature and lullabies. Even though the text elements of the story are short, there’s a joyous celebration of language within it. The use of classic texts such as Treasure Island has made the children want to explore those books – we’ve had to buy more classic text for our library because of it.
This book is set in 1919 and it’s about a girl called Henrietta. It’s shrouded in mystery at the beginning so you don’t really know what’s happened, but you know there’s been an accident and that she had a brother who has died, and that they’ve moved away to the country and mum is ill. It’s a real page turner – I finished reading it in one night when my son went to bed. He’s 10 but I would say it’s suitable for children of nine-plus. There are lots of words where my son would ask “what does that mean?”
Recommended by Alex Wheatle, author of Crongton Knights, winner of the Guardian’s 2016 children’s fiction prize
It’s a rollicking story, with lots of historical education. The main character’s father is sent away because he’s charged with a theft, and so the son has to prove his father is not guilty. He has to fight the social prejudices of the day – prejudices against poor people – to prove his father is innocent. It shows the injustice of 200 or so years ago for somebody of colour, and it’s about the imbalance of power between rich and poor, and about someone trying to fight against injustice. It’s so relevant to today, and that’s why I really enjoyed it. It’s also very educational – not many people are aware, especially school children today, that black people did exist in north Devon and places like that in the 17th or 18th century.
Recommended by Jo Clarke, librarian at Whitchurch C of E primary school, Hampshire
This is such a lovely mix of historical and contemporary stories and it captures all the excitement of the season – the frozen Thames, wondrous elves. It features people such as Berlie Doherty, Jamila Gavin, Geraldine McCaughrean, so it’s got classic writers, but also lots of contemporary writers.
The reason I love short stories is that they introduce children to new authors. Children often get stuck in a rut – “I’m just reading everything by Jacqueline Wilson.” When you give them a short story anthology it opens a whole new world. It’s suitable for a child around seven, or a child a bit older than that could read independently.
I’m a sucker for both rhyming couplets and any “mean person finds joy and love through the magic of Christmas” story, so How The Grinch Stole Christmas! – Dickens with a fluffier antagonist – is in constant demand in my family every December. The jaunty, singsong style of Dr Seuss is entrancing and comforting, especially for children, but it’s the warmth and the heart in this story that make it so unforgettable (along with classic insults like “you have termites in your smile”). No child or adult should go through a winter season without at least one visit to Whoville.
It’s easy to forget the brilliant characterisation in these stories. They’re about a girl who gets into trouble constantly, but her moral development as a character comes about as a result of her making mistakes. She learns to deal with her own vanity and pride. They’re timeless books and the things that she goes through – feelings of loss, abandonment, feeling like you don’t fit in – most young people experience today. Considering it was written in the early 1900s, it’s still incredibly relevant. There’s a remake happening of the TV series, so it’s going to come back into the public eye.
Recommended by Frank Cottrell Boyce, author of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang Flies Again, Cosmic and Millions
It’s about a school for wizards, so that may sound familiar. What is astonishing about the book is that Le Guin’s definition of magic and how it works is strangely convincing. You have to really understand something – to know its real name – before you can control it. The hero, Sparrowhawk, has therefore to find the real name of the shadow that is haunting him.
It’s a book full of magic and adventure – it has unquestionably the best map of any fantasy book. But it’s also full of beauty and a wisdom that I still draw on now. It would be the gift that keeps on giving.
Recommended by Floella Benjamin, author of Coming to England
This book it had a profound effect on me. I believe any child experiencing adversity, rejection or that feeling of not belonging will find solace in this book. It will also make them realise they are not alone, as it covers many of the issues children are facing today.
Those who suffer from depression or mental health problems, because of the unhappy situations they have to endure, will find this book will empower them to feel worthy and not to allow events to ruin their life, as it will reassure them that it is not their fault when people behave cruelly.
It’s a classic book that inspires readers. It fires up the imagination and takes the reader on an unforgettable journey.
Paul Stewart’s delightful tale of discovering your own special talents, even though they may be different from those around you, is brought to life by Jane Porter’s beautiful collage illustrations. Penguin’s deepest desire has always been to fly but everything goes wrong. It is only when penguin falls into the sea that he discovers a different way to fly. This heart-warming picture book shows children that everyone has something they’re good at. It’s simply a matter of finding what it is.
Recommended by Michael Morpurgo, children’s author, best known for War Horse, Kensuke’s Kingdom and Private Peaceful
I loved this book. Pushkin Children’s Books are to be congratulated in making it available to an English audience. How important it is, in these times, that our children read the stories from other peoples, other cultures, other times.
Set in Tokyo just before the second world war, the Little People, Bilbo, Fern and their children, Robin and Iris, live on a shelf in a dusty room full of books and are cared for by the Moriyama family. The Little People have been entrusted to the Moriyamas by an English teacher, Miss MacLachlan, who has to leave Japan after 20 years’ teaching English as the war comes closer. There is a strong sense of place and the changing seasons are beautifully described. While the story has elements of the work of Oscar Wilde and Hans Christian Andersen, the author admits to having been inspired by Kenneth Grahame and Antoine de Saint-Exupéry.
Recommended by Darren Chetty, a teacher and writer and contributor to The Good Immigrant edited by Nikesh Shukla
It’s a short novel, suitable for ages nine- to 13, written as a series of poems. The narrator is Lonnie Motion, an 11-year-old boy whose parents died four years previously in a fire and whom, having spent some time in “group home” now lives with his foster mother, Ms Edna. His teacher encourages him to “write it down before it leaves your brain” and so sets about writing a series of poems through which we learn of his feelings about the loss of his parents, his separation from his sister and the people in his life who show him love.
Woodson captures the language of a young African American boy who is determined to make sense of his world. I was struck by how well I felt I knew the other characters in the book just through their appearances in Lonnie’s poems. The warmth and optimism of the book shines through without ever feeling forced.
This is a collection of stories about Richard Feynman, one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century. It’s all about how he got into physics and the fun he had doing it. Some stories are more serious – he was involved in developing the nuclear bomb – but a lot are about how he played with concepts and was always open to new ideas. The book challenges the sense that there’s a canon of material one must learn to master the subject – it’s about mindset, creativity and fun. It’s accessible to 15- to 16-year-olds who are interested in physics.
Zoo-ology was published the month my eldest child was born, and has been a family favourite for eight years. Each spread is a safari for the senses, crammed with Joelle Jolivet’s striking animal prints. Her artwork is captivating at any age – bold enough to appeal to babies, and beautiful enough to tempt you to tear out and frame the pages. The book is a wonderful way to start talking about biodiversity, but most of all, it’s fun. When my boys were little, they sat on the pages playing animal hide and seek and spotting the hidden chameleons. Now eight, six and four, they gather around to invent their own versions of I Spy and Guess Who? Older children can pore over well-chosen facts about the featured creatures, tucked away at the back.
Recommended by Charlene Shaw, writer and teacher at Barnwell school, Hertfordshire
I’m mixed race and there weren’t any books that appealed to my ethnicity. It was the first book I connected with. It explores the idea of racism by reversing the superior race and having the black community as the ruling class. The main story line is a white boy and a black girl who are friends and they end up falling in love even though the odds are against them. The themes are more prominent in today’s society than ever – you’ve got racism, terrorism, friendship and war. The school I teach in is quite diverse, and when the Black Lives Matter protests were happening over the summer last year, I used this novel to explore the issue more deeply.
’Twas the morning of Christmas Eve, a busy day for Father Christmas. I’d just left the church after my role in a service featuring the cast from the nearby panto and was eager to return the outfit I’d borrowed. Suddenly I became aware of a young boy, girl and their mother rushing after me, mum asking if I’d say a quick hello to her children. Father Christmas never refuses such a request, so I was happy to comply.
“Father Christmas, Father Christmas,” said the daughter excitedly. “Before I came to church today I did a poo.” Acutely aware of mum’s embarrassment but loving daughter’s unguarded spontaneity about something so natural I responded, quick as a flash, “Well, what a coincidence – so did I.” The honesty and openness of children is one of the real joys of the job.
Although I’ve told inquisitive “clients” I’m as old as the hills but younger than the mountains, it was in 2006 when I first donned the beard, gold-rimmed spectacles, red coat and hat of my alter ego. I’d worked in several temporary jobs for my local council, and its events organiser, aware that I had acting experience, offered me the role for its annual ceremony where Christmas lights are turned on in the city centre by a “celebrity” and a large crowd turns out for a feast of fun and entertainment. The job was well-paid and the council would supply the costume and my size 12 wellies. What was not to like? The event went swimmingly, we all had fun and I made a point of not knocking off until the last Santa enthusiast had left for home.
I was to perform at this event for the next five years but it is in the grotto that Father Christmas really pays his dues and earns his corn. My first such gig was in a department store. On the first day my elves and I stood in the shop window, surrounded by toys. The elves were young, inexperienced students and felt a bit silly. But I loved it, particularly standing motionless as a mannequin then moving suddenly to startle passersby.
For the first couple of weeks the children were still at school and there were few grotto visitors. Instead, I was encouraged to wander around the shop, entertaining customers. Everyone from the Marx Brothers to the staff of Grace Brothers have exploited the big store’s comic potential and though I can’t claim such a pedigree, I had great fun surprising people on the escalators and taking a break in the vibrating massage chair. I also got to chat with children, parents and pensioners – always in character – in the store’s various restaurants.
The next year’s grotto was in the garden centre where there were – whisper it quietly so the kids don’t hear – two Father Christmases, one in each room of a large garden shed, which formed part of its range. In between was a reception area where we played our favourite Christmas songs and the ever-helpful elves steered our “clients” through one door or another. I’ve heard since of grottos with even more Santas as venues try to ease the often large queues that build up. I would often be encouraged to speed up the visits to ease the wait but always felt that each “consultation” should take as long as it needs for each individual child. I never want a child to leave until they’ve had a positive experience.
Children’s wish lists can be long or short, simple or works of art, expensive or complicated. They cover everything from the latest must-have toy, to a series of Argos catalogue numbers. I’ve even been asked for “a little brother”: mother and I gave each other a look. I never make a promise. I only say that I will try my very best. That’s all that any of us can do.
Personally I think of Father Christmas as a kind of holy fool, old and wise, young at heart, quite old-fashioned, but above all a kind, generous and fun-loving friend to all children, irrespective of any particular faith or none. He embodies the spirit of the nativity story’s unconditional love but also embraces a whole host of pagan and folkloric midwinter drinking and feasting traditions from around the world. He’ll happily accept proffered gifts of mince pies, sausage rolls or Christmas cake, carrots or other goodies for his reindeer, and a range of liquid refreshments encompassing whisky, brandy, port, hot chocolate, glass of milk … or a can of Stella.
He loves goodness, of course, but hopes that adults will demonstrate it too. He tries hard to be good himself but acknowledges that it can be jolly difficult to be good all of the time. And if a parent attempts to make presents dependent on giving up a comfort such as thumb or dummy, he will recall how he, as a youngster, had a similar habit that, one day, he managed to give up. Just like that.
Am I paid what I’m worth in this role? Usually not, particularly if I’ve just spent an hour with 20 children and I’m soaked with sweat. That beard and wig, if your own hair doesn’t do the job, can make things particularly hot. And then there are the times I’ve had to turn down better-paid work because I’ve committed to the grotto. Saying that, I have on occasion rejected a better hourly rate in another grotto when I felt the set-up was too much like a conveyor belt or too heavily scripted. I love to improvise and children improvise too.
What about the other rewards? For the heart, the soul? Well, the smile of a happy child is priceless. As are the words of a serial grotto visitor who tells me that I’m the best Father Christmas they’ve ever met. Of course, I’m the real one.
“Burnt-out cars, drug dealers and bums – there was nothing else here.” Balder Lehmann, a 25-year-old professional skatepark builder, is standing beneath a bridge in northern Copenhagen. “It wasn’t the nicest part of town,” he says, explaining why locals used to avoid the area.
For Lehmann, though, the location was perfect. Last Christmas, using surplus concrete, wood and reinforced steel bars, he began building a skatepark. Over the course of a few months, he and his friends constructed three adjoining sets of ramps.
With its wooden frames filled with rubble and coated in 15cm of smooth concrete, Lehmann’s skatepark is much like the ones he builds for clients – typically municipalities around Denmark – with one exception: it’s illegal.
Lehmann never sought permission from Københavns Kommune, the council that owns the land he built on. And it may not even matter – thanks to the city’s liberal approach to urban development, and the role of skateboarding.
Dubbed Underbroen (“Under the Bridge”), Lehmann’s construction is a prime example of a DIY skatepark – built quickly, cheaply and illicitly, often in a neglected part of the city such as an abandoned building. Reclaiming the city is a motive, too. DIY skateparks often try to revive long-forgotten urban spaces, thus making them busier, livelier and safer.
DIY skateparks exist in many cities, not just Copenhagen. The cluster of ramps and bowls built in the early 1990s below Portland’s Burnside Bridge is widely considered the first of its kind. Yet no city is as open-minded about their construction as the Danish capital.
A case in point is Hullet (“The Hole”) – a deep concrete bowl built in Copenhagen five years ago. Its creation is steeped in myth. In 2010, an American construction company called Grindline was hired to build a new concrete skatepark in the city. Legend has it the company’s burly builders passed on their expertise to local skaters, who scoped out a suitable location and started digging. Over the course of a year, they dug down two metres and piled up the displaced earth to make the hole deeper, before constructing a smooth concrete bowl.
Inevitably, their activity attracted the attention of the council who got on the phone to a man named William Frederiksen. As well as managing Copenhagen’s largest indoor skatepark, he works for the council’s culture department as a kind of ambassador for skateboarding. Frederiksen says his colleagues wanted to know why the skaters were digging such a big hole, and feared someone might fall into it.
But when he explained what they were doing, the council changed its tune. “They said, ‘OK, we love it and we want to keep it – but we have to figure out some kind of deal,’” Frederiksen explains. Instead of stopping the diggers, the council insisted they put up a fence.
According to Frederiksen, the council’s open-mindedness about Hullet – and subsequent DIY skateparks such as Underbroen – reflects its broader vision for Copenhagen and the role that skateboarding can play. “It wants the city to be lively, noisy, agile and progressive – and it’s thinking in a different way about how to use city space,” he says.
One measure of the council’s progressive approach is that it consults skateboarders such as Frederiksen when it redesigns public squares and streets, to make them suitable for skating. Tolerance of DIY skateparks is another reflection of its ethos.
One of the architects of that vision is Simon Strange, a member of the Social Democrats, the left-leaning party that controls the council. Elected to city hall a decade ago, he has pushed for increased support for skateboarding – such as funding CPH Open, an annual street-skating competition. He also applauds the development of DIY skateparks.
“You want to have people being active and engaging with their city,” Strange says. “Even though people are changing public space for their own purposes, they do it with love and positive energy because they want to create something.”
In particular, Strange welcomes their regenerative potential. “Very often they’re in places that nobody cares about, areas without attention, so they’re creating something out of nothing,” he says. “Even though it isn’t always completely legal, sometimes you have to lead the way as a citizen.”
Balder Lehmann agrees. “We could have asked for permission but the council might have said no,” he says. “Then what would we have done?” Eventually, of course, his skatepark came to the attention of the city’s technical and environmental department – and Anders Melamies, in particular, who leads the division responsible for streets and parks in northern Copenhagen.
Strictly speaking, Melamies says, he should have called in the bulldozers. But last year the technical and environmental department adopted a strategy known as Fælleskab København (Co-creating Copenhagen). Its vision is to develop the capital in collaboration with anyone who uses it – residents and tourists alike – to turn it into a “living city … a city with edge”.
In that light, he says his job is to find a way “to create space for skaters in a way that doesn’t interfere with other citizens’ use of the city”. With Underbroen he decided he had three options: “We could tear it down; we could leave it, close our eyes and hope that nothing happens; or we could get in touch with the people using it, and try to find a lasting solution.”
He chose the third option. “If we can explain our issues and have a dialogue, hopefully we can solve them and legalise what they have built,” he says. “It’s an impressive creation and a lot of time has gone into it. I would hate to tear it down.”
Still, the city’s open-minded approach to DIY skateparks doesn’t guarantee their survival. A skatepark built in an abandoned building on the outskirts of Christiania, the infamous free-town, is on borrowed time. Next year the building will become the new home of famous Danish restaurant Noma.
Hullet’s days appear numbered, too. In April, the city decided to turn the area into a “green residential district”, with 69 family homes scheduled to be built by 2019. No mention was made of Hullet.
Daniel Mathew teaches at the Academy for Untamed Creativity – a school that seeks to motivate teenagers to re-enter formal education. He has helped students build three DIY skateparks and insists on getting prior permission from landowners. He says it’s a shame that Hullet’s builders failed to do so.
“They never started a conversation with the guys who own the land and now it’s going to get torn down,” he says. “In two years, it’s game over. It’s a perfect skatepark and it could have been there for 10, 15 years. But that’s the DIY way – it comes and it goes.”
Lehmann stopped building Underbroen in the summer. Having spent 50,000 DKK (£5,660) on it, he’s hoping to get retrospective permission – but is prepared to remove it if he doesn’t.
“That’s the gamble. If it gets torn down, that’s how it is,” he says. “But if it does, believe me, something else is going to get built – because there are a lot of people who want to build their own thing.”
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion
For Stephen Waters, the festive season is a time of transformation – when he leaves behind his normal line of work, dons a red suit and becomes Santa Claus. 
The beard, made of realistic crepe wool, has to be prepared the night before he’s due to wear it, and takes about two hours to attach. The outfit includes a jacket lined with satin and £40-a-metre fur, spectacles, leather boots and white gloves. In his hand, he carries a candy cane walking stick and an enormous pocket watch that opens to reveal moving reindeer. A musical tricycle, lit by 300 lights as he rides into town, completes the look. “From the moment I step out the door, I’m in character,” he says. “And I don’t break character until the end of the day.”
Waters – who goes by the name of Magical Santa – is one of many self-employed Santas appearing at parties, corporate events and grottos around the UK in the run-up to Christmas. Such is the demand for this iconic character that individual Santa services are competing with Santa-for-hire agencies, while Santa schools are offering training in the ways of the great man.
One of these schools is the Ministry of Fun, set up 20 years ago by James Lovell, a year after he first became Santa himself. He came to the role almost by accident, after being asked to step in at the last minute for someone who had fallen ill. He quickly realised that the job wasn’t quite as simple as it looked. Encountering a shy child who needed to be put at ease, he was able to improvise (thanks to a background as a street performer and clown), but spent a lot of time afterwards researching Santa to make sure he had things to talk about.
“I’m always ready to talk about the reindeers,” he says. “And you need to be able to discuss the very important issue of a child who doesn’t have a chimney. When you’re Santa you’ve got to be ready for anything. You’ve got to be supremely comfortable in the role.” His company, which trained 38 people this year, is now the UK’s number one provider of Santas.
It is, arguably, the most seasonal job in the world, and every Santa will have skills elsewhere that keep the money coming in for the rest of the year. Those on the books at the Ministry of Fun have a wide variety of professions including teacher, football coach, tour guide, flood damage restorer and cold-call salesman. Out of season, Waters is an sculptor, artist, busker and handyman. But there is “good money” to be made in Santa, says Lovell, with bookings for appearances typically starting to come in as early as August.
Waters makes enough money during the festive season to keep him going for about six months, and has this year turned down about £6,000 for December because he doesn’t have enough time to take on more work. He notes that a standard rate is usually about £100 an hour, although the exact amount will depend on the client and nature of the booking.
Most of his Magical Santa business has come through word of mouth, much of which Waters attributes to his work as a “Street Santa”. This involves him setting himself up on Southend high street, with a sign saying ‘Donations Welcome’, and inviting families to come over. It’s a decent source of income – takings range between £80 to £160 for a few hours – and doubles up as an opportunity to hand out business cards.
Steven Wickham, also known as The Real Santa, takes a different approach. Work usually comes via his website, although he has also dabbled with other types of marketing: paying for a promotion on Facebook and contacting his local newspapers in Buckinghamshire for publicity. This is his second Christmas as a Santa-for-hire and, while business seems to be growing steadily, he notes that it’s a competitive area.
But Wickham also has a couple of advantages when it comes to being Santa – he’s got what he calls “the real stuff” in terms of appearance, and has played Santa on several occasions in his job as a professional actor. His credits include Father Christmas in TV’s Mrs Brown’s Boys, the 2013 Littlewood’s Christmas advert, and he is currently appearing on Italian TV for mobile network TIM’s festive campaign. Wickham has already found that having an authentic beard counts for something among some customers, with a recent booking coming through for that very reason. 
There are, however, challenges other than physical appearance. One of these is a tendency by children to ask difficult questions. “The trickiest questions are the saddest ones,” says Lovell. “I was once asked if daddy could come home for Christmas – that was pretty tough. Even worse was when a child asked if I could make their little brother better. Santa doesn’t need to get involved in any of that – it’s not Santa’s job to be a counsellor, so to speak – so you’d quickly say something like: ‘I’m sorry you have troubles, but I’m Father Christmas and I’m going to make sure you have a great time this Christmas.’ Always go positive.”
Practical safeguarding issues are also a consideration. Many Santas now come with a DBS check, although this is not a legal requirement for the job, as well as public liability insurance. More generally, there are some good practice rules to be followed. In his conditions of booking, Waters stipulates that there must be two adults in the room with him at any one time, that he’s there to entertain rather than babysit, and that he isn’t left alone with children at any point.
And then, of course, the role of Santa comes with another significant responsibility: to keep the magic alive. “You hear tales of grumpy old chaps in the department store and of people who were scared of Santa for years,” says Wickham. “So I do strongly feel that you need to have the right kind of twinkly character. Because you’re messing with children’s minds. They still believe it’s real, and it should be. There are very few characters out there who can actually make people happy like Santa does.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
With the bright lights, colourful gifts and jolly presence of Father Christmas, Santa’s grottos are a seasonal favourite for families across the UK. But not all children are able to enjoy them.
For thousands of children in Britain diagnosed with autism, the trip to sit on Santa’s knee can be a frightening mix of huge crowds and loud noises, a charity has said.
This year, dozens of autism-friendly Santa’s grottos have opened around the UK, launched by parents who want their children to be able to join in a magical part of Christmas without feeling distressed.
Instead of the huge queues, which can induce panic in some children with autism, the grottos have scheduled appointments or host only small groups. There are no flashing lights, Santa has been trained and the loud music has been replaced with a sensory room where the children can relax.
Jo-Ann D’Costa-Manuel, founder of the charity Autism Parent Empower, said more than a thousand parents had contacted her to say they were thrilled about her launch of an autism-friendly Santa’s grotto in Crawley, Sussex.
“For some families this will be the first time they will get the opportunity to experience the magic of Santa with their child,” she said. “For other families, who feel extremely isolated and misunderstood, they are comforted that awareness and acceptance is now unfolding into the mainstream and nationwide, too. A parent contacted me to say this was the first time in nine years she was able to take her son [to the grotto] – now that is what Christmas spirit is truly all about.”
Lynn Westerman Holt said taking her 11-year-old son, Alexander, to the local Santa’s grotto was a “disaster” for years. “The noise of the crowd, the heat of the crowd, the smell of the perfume, the flashing lights. That’s when you see the meltdown,” she said.
There is also anecdotal evidence that the autism-friendly grottos may be helping some children who find it difficult to communicate. Westerman Holt, who helped set up an autism-friendly grotto in the Yorkshire town of Wetherby, said she cried when Alexander – who has nonverbal autism – was able to talk to Father Christmas.
“Although he’s now 11 and neurotypical 11-year-olds probably don’t believe in Father Christmas any more, he almost didn’t have any concept of Christmas until he was six or seven,” she said. “Now he’s getting the real wonder and magic of it. He believes he’s really talking to Father Christmas.”
Westerman Holt helped launch her local autism-friendly grotto three years ago with the charity Autism Angels. What started with 20 children had this year grown to 100, some of whom travelled more than two hours to visit Santa.
She added: “When you’re the parent of a child with autism you do feel very isolated because Christmas is supposed to be a really magical time. It’s supposed to be like it is on the TV and the movies and everyone’s playing happy families. That heightens the difference between your family and the typical family – it is quite lonely and it is heartbreaking.”
Kerrie Stephenson set up a similar Santa’s grotto in York after her three-year-old son, Jack, was diagnosed with autism earlier this year. About 45 children attended and the idea proved so popular that the parents are planning autism-friendly Easter egg hunts and a Halloween event – without the scary costumes.
“I had parents crying, telling me it was the most relaxed the children had been, people weren’t judged,” she said. “I’ve had lots of parents saying to me it was awful queueing, their child screaming, too many people dressed up. We didn’t have any music on and the only person dressed up was Santa.”
Daniel Cadey, autism access development manager at the National Autistic Society, said: “It is really heartening to see people making autism-friendly Santa’s grottos. Like anyone else, autistic people and their families want the opportunity to join in Christmas festivities. But many children on the autism spectrum rely on routine and their sensory sensitivities mean they can find the busy, loud and unpredictable environment of Santa’s grottos disorientating and overwhelming.
“Our Too Much Information campaign highlights the need for greater public understanding of autism, so autistic people and their families aren’t left socially isolated. The loud music and crowds – even the look and feel of lots of decorations – can make public spaces during the holiday period particularly overwhelming, so it’s fantastic to see businesses and individuals taking it on themselves to make the often small adjustments necessary to create autism-friendly alternatives that allow autistic children and their families the chance to take part in their local Christmas cheer.”
It’s a sign of the chasm between television and film that when a film has a female lead, or is a story about the lives of women, it is still considered both a curiosity and a potential risk. It’s hard to imagine a fiasco as daft as the one surrounding the Ghostbusters reboot taking place had it been a series. Present-day television is more democratic and open to new ideas, and, as a result, this year’s glut of nuanced and complex stories about women has been astounding. While complicated masculinity had its own champions – Grayson Perry: All Man, Louis Theroux’s documentary about alcoholism, the oddball despair of Flowers – women have been on the frontline of the year’s most innovative shows, as creators and stars, and often both at the same time.
A six-part comedy about self-loathing and loss made for an unlikely most likeable show, but Fleabag was a disarming victory for a damaged, disturbing fable. The titular Fleabag grimly destroys the people around her as if compelled to do so by an unknown force; we viewers are taken in as her confidantes and shown sex, family and friendship through a deadened, grieving heart. The anti-heroine has been around for a long time, but writer and star Phoebe Waller-Bridge wove new threads through that tapestry and told a version of young female life that incorporated truths about promiscuity, loneliness and never feeling good enough. Remarkably, it was also very funny – you can charge what you like in a guinea-pig-themed cafe, apparently – not least in showing the always-lovely Olivia Colman as a thoroughly nasty piece of work.
There’s been a lot of humour in despair throughout the year, which certainly feels appropriate for 2016. “Troubled” women can be overused to tepid effect, but 2016 saw traditionally dramatic areas such as mental illness and mourning turned into witty and inventive comedies. Netflix’s Lady Dynamite, starring cult standup Maria Bamford, told a version of her hospitalisation for a bipolar disorder and subsequent return to showbiz with a surreal elegance. Meanwhile, Tig Notaro’s One Mississipi found the blackest of humour in the similarly semi-autobiographical tale of Notaro’s return to her home town after brutal cancer treatment and the death of her mother. Transparent, though stretching the credulity of its “comedy” billing, continued to deliver the extraordinary complexity it established over its first two seasons. While Maura explored the shifting boundaries of her identity, the rest of the cast addressed their own limitations, and between Rabbi Raquel’s wavering faith and Shelly’s transformative one-woman show – which gave Alanis Morissette’s 90s hit Hand In My Pocket a new lease of life – it was the kind of sucker-punch TV that lingers in your mind and your heart.
Maura and Shelly’s tussle over a maternal role was one of many examples of motherhood at the centre of the story. Better Things, written by and starring Pamela Adlon, and co-created by Louis CK, dramatised Adlon’s life as the single mother of three young girls, and her all-female household – with a scene-stealing, over-the-top turn from Celia Imrie as the dotty English grandmother – was beautifully touching and frank. The pilot for Motherland, by Sharon Horgan and Graham Linehan, explored a scabrous world of competitive middle-class parenting and has been deservedly picked up for a full run next year. While it gave us a fine young girl superhero in Eleven, Stranger Things was ultimately driven by a mother’s hunt for her missing son, with Winona Ryder reclaiming a little of her iconic past as the frantic, fairy-light-loving Joyce Byers. The Scandi-noir-esque new series of The Missing zipped through a breathtakingly intricate plot of abduction and war crimes flanked by a story of motherly love and determination. We even got to see the reality of balancing a family life with a demanding career in American Crime Story: The People vs OJ Simpson, in which Sarah Paulson’s Marcia Clark was given the fleshed-out humanity she has long deserved.
In the big blockbusters, too, female characters were given equal billing. Having long been accused of treating its women with disdain – a not unjustified complaint, given its earlier lackadaisical attitude to rape scenes – Game of Thrones spent much of this season leading its female characters to victory: Arya over the waif; Daenerys over the slavers; Sansa over Ramsay Bolton and Cersei over everyone (she had a lot of revenge to do). Westworld, a parable of robots used and abused by humanity as they begin to reach their own sentience, wrapped its sense of justice up in Dolores, the sweet prairie girl waking from a nightmare, and Maeve, the bloodthirsty madam who breaks out of the matrix.
But there is one woman on whose shoulders all the world’s troubles hung this year: Catherine Cawood. Happy Valley’s long-suffering sergeant was implicated in a murder, helped to track down a serial killer as well as a bent and murderous detective, while also protecting her grandson from the spitting rage of his possessive rapist father, Tommy Lee Royce, and saving her sister from a relapse into addiction. And with British succinctness, she did it all in six episodes, and still had time to get drunk. To fix Britain’s messy political landscape, here’s what I propose: Cawood for PM, 2020. It’s the only way.
During the festive season the Portuguese capital overdoses on cakes, desserts, fried pastries etc, with people queuing to buy them in pastelarias (bakeries). My favourite are sonhos (dreams) – light, deep-fried doughnuts, sprinkled with sugar and cinnamon. They can be made with flour and eggs, or with flour and mashed boiled pumpkin. There are good ones at Pastelaria Versailles, a beautiful, art nouveau cafe dating back to 1922. Still, bolo rei (king cake) is probably the most popular treat and you’ll see it everywhere. The old cafe Confeitaria Nacional (near Rossio square) introduced this French cake to Lisbon in the 19th century, and now it’s baked all over the country. It’s dry, with soft dough, and is not too sweet, with nuts and candied fruits. Bolo-rainha is the same but without the candied fruits. Whoever finds the dry broad bean hidden inside has to buy the next bolo rei. 
Célia Pedroso, who offers foodie tours of Lisbon through culinarybackstreets.com
The scent of spicy, baked biscuits marks the start of the festive season in the Low Countries. Speculoos, a crunchy biscuit made with brown sugar and cinnamon, is eaten all year round and known worldwide through the miniature version served with cups of coffee. But the biscuit was originally associated with Saint Nicholas Day, celebrated in early December. Traditionally, children would leave their shoes by the chimney with carrots for Saint Nicholas’s horse and in the morning find biscuits in their place. Although the Flanders towns of Ghent and Bruges are strong on cookies, Brussels has claimed speculoos as its own. During December, Brussels bakers make one-foot-long speculoo Christmas trees, set in traditional wooden moulds. Best known of the cookie makers is Maison Dandoy on the aptly-named Rue au Beurre.
Jennifer Rankin
On the days leading up to Christmas a curious site can be seen (and smelled) on the streets of Prague. Throughout the city, fish farmers dressed in full garb sell live carp from huge water-filled tanks. With the original recipe attributed to Magdalena Dobromila Rettigova, called the mother of Czech cuisine, fried carp served with potato salad has been the traditional Christmas meal served in Czech households since at the least the 19th century. While some have the fish vendors butcher the carp on the spot, the more entertaining tradition is taking the carp home live and letting it swim around in the bathtub until it’s time to prepare the meal, served on Christmas Eve. To try this traditional dish head to Pilsen Restaurant in the Municipal House or Aureole (both offer special Christmas menus). And don’t forget to save a scale, dry it and put it in your wallet for the year as doing so is said to bring good fortune.
In sweet contrast, Vanocka is a delicious sweet bread that is traditionally served on the morning of Christmas Day. Similar to a braided brioche or Jewish Challa, this yummy yeast-based loaf, dating back to the 16th-century and taking its name from the Czech word for Christmas (Vanoce), includes raisons, almonds and lemon zest and in some recipes includes anise or nutmeg and is topped with powdered sugar. Two good spots to try Vanocka are Eska, a restaurant and bakery hybrid, and Antoninovo Pekarstvi, a neighbourhood bakery with two locations. Slice and top with butter or honey, or just enjoy this tasty Czech Christmas loaf plain.
Joann Plockova
Spending New Year’s Eve in Berlin will allow you to debunk one of the most enduring myths about the German capital via a culinary tradition: in June 1963, US president John F Kennedy made a fool of himself saying “Ich bin ein Berliner”, which in German means “I am a doughnut”. In fact, the proper German term for a doughnut with a jam filling is a Berliner pfannkuchen or “Berlin pancake”. In most parts of the country people refer to it as a Berliner – but in Berlin itself people call it a pfannkuchen. Even though most bakeries sell Berliner pancakes all year around, they are particularly associated with New Year’s Eve parties, and tradition demands that for every eight doughnuts filled with jam, you slip in one filled with mustard (senf) to play a trick on an unlucky guest. Enjoy, and cut JFK some slack.
Philip Oltermann
The olivier salad, a dish rich in mayonnaise, simply can’t be avoided if you want to fully experience winter festivities Russian-style. Also known as Russian or Stolichniy salad, it’s democratic, hailing from Soviet times when fancy food was not easy to procure: it’s just potatoes, vegetables, ham, eggs and mayonnaise. Even the characters in the ultimate Russian new year film, the Irony of Fate romantic comedy, eat it. To get the most affordable version of the salad go to Teremok, a chain of Russian style fast food cafes, where olivier is served deconstructed for you to mix up yourself. Varnichnaya, a chain of dumpling cafes, offers a chicken olivier in all of its branches. Or, if you’re willing to splash out, go to Mari Vanna, where prices for ham olivier start at RUB470 (£6).
Sasha Raspopina
You can’t spend Christmas in Denmark without being served the nation’s favourite Christmas pudding, risalamande – a cold rice pudding with whipped cream and chopped almonds served with a hot cherry sauce. Originally rice pudding was the traditional Christmas dessert, but as the price of rice rose sharply during the second world war, the cream and almonds were added to make it last. Danes celebrate Christmas on the evening of 24 December when the pudding is served in a large bowl, and a whole almond is added. Whoever gets the almond gets the “almond present”. This has been known to cause great disputes as some people – mainly uncles and grandpas – hide the almond in their hand or in their cheek, thus leaving members of their family not only in great suspense, but with aching bellies from eating way too much of the rich and filling dessert. If you are not celebrating Christmas in a Danish home, you can get risalamande at many restaurants in Copenhagen. A local favourite is Schønnemann’s, in the city centre where you get some of the city’s best smørrebrød. Be sure to have the pickled herring and the schnapps too.
Andrea Bak
In the Romanian countryside the tradition is to slaughter a pig at Christmas, and while this practice is long gone in big cities such as Bucharest, pork dishes remain ubiquitous throughout the holiday period – along with copious amounts of țuică (fruit brandy). Sarmale (minced meat, rice and onions wrapped in cabbage leaves) is available year-round but has a prominent place on the Christmas table, while dishes such as piftie (pork and garlic in gelatine), șorici (salted pork rinds) and jumări (chunks of pork fat, fried) feature heavily. For those visiting Bucharest over Christmas and looking to try some of these meaty treats, traditional restaurants like Caru’ cu bere, a 19th-century beer hall in the heart of the city, Hanu’ lui Manuc, a centuries-old traders inn, and Curtea Berarilor have a full menu of classic Romanian dishes, with platters of the above featured prominently. 
Kit Gillet
Every December large groups of people vie for spots at seasonal buffets called julbord (Christmas table). This is built up from base items – pickled herring, cured salmon and meatballs – regular staples in smörgåsbords. But as Christmas is the mother of all seasonal buffets, julbord draws on 19th-century Swedish soul food traditions with specific dishes, such as Jansson’s Temptation (potato-anchovy casserole), dopp i grytan (bread dipped in pork broth), lutfisk (gelatinous white fish dish), risgrynsgröt (rice porridge), and julskinka (Christmas ham); all washed down with a non-alcoholic sweet root beer-like beverage, julmust. Restaurants are often fully booked to celebrate this official end of the working season, but for an atmospheric julbord experience, hop aboard Strömma’s steamboats for SEK 595 (£51) as you sail around Stockholm’s archipelago.
Lola Akinmade Åkerström
The French Christmas meal - traditionally known as Le Reveillon – is celebrated on the evening of 24 December – and involves the politically incorrect, and banned in some countries, foie gras, as well as oysters, smoked salmon, turkey or capon and a chocolate cake known as a buche with, depending on the budget, champagne or sparkling wine. Much of this is actually quite new. Traditionally, Catholic families ate their Christmas meal on returning from midnight mass, which in those days started at midnight. Back then Christmas dishes depended on the region: oysters in the west, foie gras in Alsace and the south-west, pork in rural areas.
The Christmas buche or log cake is a tradition apart. It used to be that a log was put on the fire to keep it going through the evening until the family returned from mass. In recent times, with fewer chimneys, the log has been replaced by a chocolate cake desert, these days more often than not industrially produced and filled with ice-cream. A three-course Christmas menu with starters, including foie gras and/or snails and a glass of champagne costs €69 at Julien, part of the fabulously decorated art-nouveau chain that includes Bofinger, La Coupole, Flo and the Terminus Nord (by the Gare du Nord). It’s in the previously unfashionable, but increasingly trendy 10th arrondissement.
Kim Wilsher
Shellfish, bream, lamb, and turkey may be festive staples in Spain but nothing says Christmas quite so cloyingly as the plethora of sugary treats that weigh down tables and stomachs at the end of December. Spanish nougat (turrón) can be hard or soft but its appeals seldom wanes. Similarly popular are polvorones (shortbread, the name of which hints at the dusty debris into which they crumble) and mantecados (like polvorones but enriched with lard). Among Madrid’s oldest and best known confectioners are Casa Mira, La Antigua Pastelería del Pozo and El Riojano, all of which have been serving the sweet-toothed of the city since the 19th century. Take an appetite and expectations of a serious sugar rush.
Sam Jones
My family and I have lived on the edge of the Mudumalai wildlife sanctuary in the Nilgiri mountains, south India, for over three decades now. The children grew up here. Yet the thrill of knowing there’s an elephant in the garden is a feeling we all still savour. We cherish our elephant memories and can’t ever seem to become blasé about them.
Our elephant adventures began in 1984 when, with our one-year-old daughter, my husband and I crossed the jungle in a dilapidated jeep, sticking behind a lorry for comfort and company. The herds of elephants standing like sentinels on either side of the Bandipur-Mudumalai forest highway had us frantically praying for our safety. Mostly, one elephant, the matriarch, would trumpet loudly, warning us off, especially if there were young calves with the herd. Then she would angrily paw the ground as a prelude to charging. We would race away before she could carry out her threat.
It was wise to flee. We heard stories of tourists whose jeeps were overturned, while a couple of foolhardy photographers were killed because they ventured out of their cars and moved too close, dismissing the Adivasi guide’s pleas to stop immediately. Adivasis – India’s indigenous, aboriginal people – were originally hunter-gatherers who lived in the forests and knew them inside out. Many still do. Elephants are deceptive animals. They look docile and unthreatening, so tourists think it’s safe to picnic in the jungle. Yet angry elephants have knocked down interlopers in seconds before they could take off.
We locals have a love-hate relationship with wildlife. We take pride in our beautiful mountains and forests, and the excitement of visitors when there’s a porcupine outside the window or, even better, big cat noises at night. I go ballistic at the sound of sambar deer because one nocturnal banqueting visit will decimate my much-loved garden, so I adore the leopards that keep them away. Yet I loathe the panther that killed and devoured our beloved dog Elsa. All of us are acutely aware that we are privileged to live here. The animals’ presence brings something romantic, exotic and surreal into our lives.
A few days ago my conservationist son sent excited messages about a first-time visitor to our place, a wild elephant named Moopan. “Not much serious damage,” he texted. “He enjoyed your patch of anthuriums, though.” I smiled – what price a few fading anthuriums if Mr Moopan fancied them? The next morning, our toddler grand-daughter phoned excitedly to ask, “Has Mr Moopan come back to see us?”
Some months ago, another young pachyderm paid us a visit. Our dinner guests were forced to stay the night as an elephant on our narrow, winding road was not something the jeep could easily avoid. But all of us were enthralled. Our youngest son, a film-maker, was over the moon, photographing and filming the elephant outside his bedroom window. The jumbo was so close, we could have touched him if we’d dared to reach out. Perhaps he sensed he had us in thrall because he chomped his way calmly through the clump of bamboo, unperturbed by our presence, before lumbering off early in the morning.
We got off lightly. Just a few weeks ago, a local house was badly damaged after an elephant calf apparently ventured inside to explore, followed by the protective mother. After inadvertently knocking down several walls, the elephants found the store of rice and other grains, smashing up the kitchen as they devoured it. Ambika, the owner of the house, was philosophical about it, resigned to the realities of living with elephants. She hopes to get some compensation from the government, and mentioned that she needed to be more careful about leaving her home unoccupied.
Less dramatically, in the Adivasi village of Chembakolly, an elephant sheltering from the monsoon rains once got bored and began nibbling at the school’s thatched roof. The rain didn’t stop, so Ms Jumbo kept munching. By the time the clouds moved on, she had eaten half of it, giving the children an unplanned holiday.
Adivasis regard wildlife very differently from other, more urbanised people. They believe, quite simply, that the animals have as much right to food as human forest-dwellers. One elephant took to coming towards the local Adivasi hospital every evening. With minimal fuss, the tribal staff adjusted their schedules to suit the animal. One lad cut down most of his sugarcane crop and strewed it along the path leading away to the jungle. My son asked him why. “The poor fellow wouldn’t come here unless he was really hungry,” went the very logical reply. “If I put the cane down for him he’ll eat it and go back to the forest. That way no one will be hurt.”
Sitting on a verandah, you’ll hear some lovely wildlife stories. Tall tales? They sound like it, but who knows?
“That naughty fellow,” one forest-dwelling Adivasi begins, “stands outside my hut. I stepped out in the middle of the night, needed to pee, walked straight into him. ‘Move,’ I said, giving him a whack. Thought he was a cow. Next morning I saw the elephant dung outside my house. Gave me a fright, I can tell you, to think I smacked an elephant.”
Someone laughs. “Quite a few drinks you must have had to mistake an elephant for a cow?”
“It was a pitch-dark night. I was half-asleep,” protests the raconteur.
Such delightful stories could fill a book. But there’s another side of the coin. It’s really not that much fun to bump into an elephant in the dark. Far too many people have not lived to tell the tale.
Death by elephant is gruesome, grisly, sordid and terrible. Unsuspecting people who stumble across an enraged elephant stand no chance whatsoever. Kokila, an Adivasi woman we knew, went out to collect firewood and was just a few feet from her home when an elephant picked her up, flung her to the ground and pulverised her. No one knows why. Forest officials had the horrible task of picking up the pieces, and returning her trampled remains to her relatives in a bag. That vivacious, laughing woman, who loved to dance and sing, had been smashed to smithereens in minutes.
So elephants on the doorstep make life unpredictable and dangerous for the vulnerable. It’s difficult for armchair environmentalists to even begin to grasp this reality. It’s all very well to pontificate, as I’ve heard city folks do, that “we humans are encroaching on their forests.” But what’s the solution?
When a poor farmer borrows heavily to plant a crop, he’ll do anything to protect it. His life depends on it. Marauding elephants raiding an about-to-be harvested paddy field cannot expect to be welcomed like special guests. The battle between beast and farmer is ugly. We’ve heard of people flinging flaming tyres on to raider elephants. Apparently the burning rubber sticking to their backs is a sure-fire way of driving them away. I shudder at the thought – but it happens regularly.
In 1987, an elephant died in a nearby paddy field. It had more than 40 festering bullet wounds all over its body. Poachers possibly – but also farmers taking desperate potshots to protect their crops.
Experts are working on solutions to human-elephant conflicts. Some are doomed to failure, like the schemes to dig trenches or build electric fences around human settlements. Elephants rapidly suss them out and clamber in, around and over them. My son is working on a local early warning system to warn people via text messages when there’s an elephant nearby. Apparently being alert to an elephant in the vicinity is paramount in avoiding tragedy.
There are more questions than answers, for sure. But as my husband put it, “More people die in car accidents every single day, in every city on the globe. But they won’t take cars off the roads, will they?” So we need to strive for practical ways of preventing elephant accidents. And, romanticised though it seems, look to traditional forest dwellers to understand the animals better.
A recipe for a very merry Christmas drink for 17th century monks, beginning with ten pints of brandy, has been rediscovered by a Durham university academic, in the archives of Ampleforth Abbey in north Yorkshire.
The recipes – there were two similar versions, one for a punch, one for a drink known as “shrub” – were written down for English Benedictine monks who were in exile in France after the dissolution of the monasteries. Both were flavoured with orange and lemon peel, with added sugar and water, and involved days of steeping and mixing the ingredients.
Although monastic communities commonly drank alcohol because the quality of drinking water was so unreliable, these recipes were clearly not an everyday tipple. Dr James Kelly, from the department of theology and religion at Durham University, said the volume of the ingredients and the care that went into them were significant.
“The quantity, and the time taken to make the drink, suggests that this was something to be enjoyed on special occasions by the whole monastic community – not a quick drink for cocktail hour.”
He discovered the recipes as part of his Monks in Motion project, which looked into the travels and influence of the English Benedictine Monks after they were forced into exile.
Ampleforth was founded when the monks had to move again after the French Revolution, and returned to England as the anti-Catholic laws were gradually relaxed in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. As the archives prove, they brought their favourite recipes back with them.
The name of the monastic order is still associated with the sweet herbal liqueur Benedictine, which was claimed to have been created by them at the great abbey in Fécamp in France –. But it was in fact a brilliant marketing wheeze by the 19th century entrepreneur who invented it.
Move over prawn cocktails and vol-au-vents. Sales of upmarket readymade Christmas canapes are booming as hosts stock up with delights such as miniature prawn doughnuts and salmon carpaccio.
With tills ringing as Christmas food shopping gets under way, this week will be the busiest in the UK for sales of party food and snacks over the festive season, according to supermarkets. This year, unusual and eye-catching modern “sweet made savoury” treats inspired by luxury delicacies from top Parisian stores and patisseries such as Fauchon have emerged as a striking trend in some supermarket aisles.
New from Marks & Spencer, for example – which has launched a record 260 new food and drink products for this year’s festive season – are seafood knickerbocker glories, hot and sour prawn doughnuts and smoked salmon carpaccio, while among Waitrose’s nibbles with a savoury twist are salmon and crab profiteroles and mini beef and chicken pies that resemble mince pies. With Christmas Day breakfast of growing importance, breakfast canapes are expected to be popular.
“It’s clear customers are getting more and more sophisticated in their taste and are really looking for something out of the ordinary,” said Sandra Ziles, head of product development at M&S.
“Food has become the most important part of Christmas and customers want to wow their guests. It’s interesting to see how traditions have changed – 1970s favourites prawn cocktail and vol-au-vents are now losing out to fresher, cleaner flavours with a twist.”
M&S expects to sell a staggering 140m pieces of party food over the festive season, washed down by 10m glasses of Prosecco.
A key source of inspiration for Ziles and her team is Paris – which they typically visit at least a year ahead of Christmas to scour the shelves and aisles of top groceries, tasting the products as they go along. The smoked salmon carpaccio in its new range, for example, was inspired last year by a similar product in the department store Le Bon Marché’s Grande Épicerie – a recently reopened food hall famous for its desserts and patisserie as well as gourmet savoury products. The retailer was similarly inspired by sweet products for the smoked salmon mousse-filled, gilded baubles that adorn its seafood starters and terrine.
The Co-op – the UK’s largest convenience retailer with 2,800 outlets – predicts revellers will snap up a record 56m canapes and 26m glasses of Prosecco. It is expecting to see sales of buffet favourites soar – including 22m cocktail sausage rolls and 4.4m mini-bites. Sales of chilled party foods are up 4% on the same time last year, according to a spokesperson, who added: “Co-op is the country’s leading community food retailer and our stores are open over the festive period to meet customer needs. We are expecting a busy Christmas Eve and our stores have been manned efficiently to ensure customers receive the best service.”
Now on sale at Waitrose is its large version of arguably the most eye-catching dessert to grace the Christmas table – a bacon and banana-flavoured trifle devised by Heston Blumenthal – which, dusted with gold “nibs”, is among the many puddings this year with the bling factor.
Fresh and pre-ordered turkeys go into most stores on Monday. The big supermarkets are expecting Christmas food shopping to start in earnest mid-week and peak on so-called festive Friday, which will be the busiest trading day of the whole year. Shoppers are likely to leave buying festive fresh vegetables as late as possible to ensure tip-top condition, but the latest supermarket price war means they can snap up potatoes, carrots and sprouts for as little as 19p from German discounter Aldi, 20p from Asda and 29p from Lidl.
Last year’s trend of “posh crisps” – featuring flavours such as gin and tonic and even pulled pork – has gone from strength to strength. The Co-op has already raised eyebrows with its Christmas Dinner crisps, described as “a delicious mix of turkey and stuffing, carrot, maple parsnip, and everyone’s favourite... sprout crisps”.
Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls cost £1.03 per minute from a BT landline. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
Brief letters: Fun in your fifties | Another word for hygge | Rugged physiognomy | The Kremlin and Strictly Come Dancing
Australia is not a country of many Christmas traditions. Prawns on the day can be pretty usual, families who insist on a hot lunch on a 30-degree day are still common enough while the rest of the country is enjoying cold ham, and Santas are still expected to dress in the full red suit.
But thanks to Australia’s extreme distances (my in-laws live the distance from Budapest to London away from my parents) and fewer jobs that shut down at Christmas, a quasi-tradition is orphan’s Christmas. Not permanent, but seasonal: Christmas away from family with friends or acquaintances or nobody.
My first Christmas away was when I was living three hours from home but had to work on the day, so after work I sat in my apartment complex’s pool and watched a holidaying family splash around and smile at me pityingly.
I was 18 and felt incredibly grown up in that cute way a teenager can find something as mundane as grocery shopping for themselves thrilling. Not only had I worked Christmas Day, I was alone. Two years later I was working again and my flatmates, all from Adelaide, could not afford the trip from Queensland for the holidays. It was my first proper orphan’s Christmas.
We had an ordinary barbecue and drank too much with nobody to tell us not to. Driving to the orphan’s Christmas from work I was pulled over by police who noticed the expired registration sticker on my car but in the spirit of Christmas decided to let me go without running the car through the system. (I recently told two Aboriginal men this story and they looked at each other before bursting into laughter: “That actually happens to white people?!”)
Since then I have spent Christmas in Ireland; at the beach with my boss; and once in my hometown being threatened by my mother that she will tell our dad about our bad behaviour in mass.
An orphan’s Christmas isn’t always the answer to a family-less Christmas. Psychologist and health centre director Suzanne Leckie, from Sane Australia, says loneliness is common at Christmas and it has been a hot topic for months on the organisation’s forums.
“There’s an enormous amount of loneliness,” she said. “People are alone because they literally don’t have friends or family, but sometimes people are lonely because they are forced into company with family and friends where they don’t feel accepted.
“We recently had a forum about whether to ignore Christmas. For some people that’s a better choice. Rather than thinking people are nestled with family having a lovely time, just treat it as a day with better food, or a day where you just treat yourself. We’ve been calling it ‘reclaim Christmas’.”
Leckie suggests people could take advantage of the empty streets and enjoy places that are usually packed.
Naturally there’s an app called Orphan Christmas, an Australian not-for-profit that allows people to invite others who don’t have friends or family close by to come over for Christmas.
Several bars and restaurants are advertising orphans’ Christmas specials, although not often on the big day. On Facebook In London a Muslim-owned restaurant has invited the homeless and the elderly to dine for free on Christmas Day.
Being away from home for Christmas is a discombobulating thing.
After 18 years of doing the same thing every Christmas – being surrounded by more than 30 aunts, uncles and cousins – there is suddenly just you waking up in a house with a tree branch hastily decorated with twinkling lights. The roads are empty, and people biting into luscious meals cheerily greet you as you pass their house while you have butter on toast for a late breakfast.
Then there is the strange intimacy with the ragtag group of people you end up sharing this exalted day with. Usually an orphan’s Christmas is an eclectic smattering of colleagues, friends and acquaintances’ cousins. Can this really be Christmas? Everything feels wrong. There’s no grandfather handing out the presents. And sometimes there are no presents.
Christmas away from home throws off the final shackles of your childhood. You find yourself among other adults, and everything has changed. You realise you can go weeks without hearing either of your parents’ voices, you choose what to eat at every meal, and nobody cares if you wear a hat or sunscreen when you’re outside.
All these impossibly grown-up things you had imagined for so long, and now you are alone at Christmas and you realise: I’m an adult.
I much prefer going home for Christmas.
What’s your experience of being apart from your family at Christmas? Tell us in comments below.
Facebook, as everyone knows, is the devil. And Facebook in December is the devil’s armpit. We are approximately one week from the absolute nadir of it all, when the whole platform will collapse in on itself in a dismal, needy flurry of jet-propelled Aren’t-I-Lucky consumerist gift-haul photos. But by then at least we’ll all be hardened towards it, because by then we’ll have suffered through an entire month of Elf on the Shelf.
Now, I know that the Guardian doesn’t have a particularly festive reputation, and I realise that what I’m about to say isn’t exactly going to help this reputation. But hear me out: all I want for Christmas is to stamp on Elf on the Shelf’s throat until it coughs up blood and dies.
I know this is going to sound like hyperbole, given everything that has happened this year, but Elf on the Shelf is easily the most violently dreadful thing to happen in 2016. How I long for the happier days of 2015, when nobody knew what an Elf on the Shelf was, back before it spawned and multiplied like the Zika virus and threatened to monopolise every home in the country. What I’d give to go back in time, Inception myself inside the mind of the Elf on the Shelf creator and scream the word “bastards” at them so loudly that they forgot to ever invent the bloody thing.
There is a chance – a minuscule chance, admittedly – that you don’t know what an Elf on the Shelf is. If that’s the case, allow me to fill you in. An Elf on the Shelf is a small, posable toy elf that costs £31.95 and ostensibly acts as a scout for Father Christmas.
You put the elf on a shelf in early December and inform your children that he will always be watching and judging them for signs of bad behaviour. Then, just as your children learn to fear this nightmarish, murderer-looking totalitarian snitch, you start to move it around at night. Your children will wake up, look at the empty shelf, wonder where the elf has gone, and then find him, say, next to the toothbrushes in the bathroom. “Wow, this elf really enjoys scrutinising your entire life for traces of unacceptable behaviour,” you tell your child, who has now subconsciously made the decision to grow up under a pseudonym in an off-grid hut with tape covering their laptop’s webcam, just to escape the relentless corrosive judgment of the Elf on the Shelf.
Although Elf on the Shelf feels like it has gained ubiquity overnight, in reality it has enjoyed a sinister slow burn. It began 12 years ago as a self-published picture book in the US, and has gradually snowballed to the point that transatlantic success felt painfully inevitable. There were murmurings about Elf on the Shelf in Britain last year, but this is the year when it has really taken hold. Type “Elf” into Google and one of the first autocomplete suggestions is “on the Shelf”. The Elf on the Shelf Twitter account has 138,000 followers. According to Google News, almost 20 new articles about Elf on the Shelf are being published every single day. If you’ve got Instagram and a follow a certain type of person, you will see just how unstoppable this mangy little intruder has become.
The thing that most rankles about all this is just how aggressively Elf on the Shelf wants to become a timeless Christmas tradition. Every Elf on the Shelf comes emblazoned with the phrase “A Christmas Tradition”, which is immediately undone by the slightly needier “Adopt a New Family Tradition This Holiday Season” right underneath it. So it’s not really a tradition at all, but it figures that it can be if it tells you often enough. It’s the festive equivalent of Donald Trump’s Make America Great Again hat, determined to string you along until it’s too late. It’s a post-truth doll for a post-truth age.
And this hurts, because Christmas traditions are hard-won things. For example, my wife and I come from vastly different backgrounds, and Christmas Day is essentially a battle between the pair of us to see who gets to relive their childhood most vividly. Her dream Christmas is ornate and frilly, involving long walks in the country and carefully staggered presents that, for some reason, must definitely include a walnut in a shoe. Mine basically just involves me walking downstairs with a hangover, tearing open all my presents in 30 seconds flat like some ridiculous fat Godzilla, and then lying on the sofa with a tummy ache for the rest of the day. Both days are equally valid, because they have both been carefully forged over decades. And whatever ungainly walnuts-and-tummy-ache compromise we will end up reaching as a married couple will be just as valid, because we will have made it ourselves.
But buying into a sinister, scowling, Santa-hatted Chucky doll whose sole purpose is to intimidate children into meekness, simply because it has the word “tradition” printed across its front, isn’t valid at all. It’s terrifying and cynical, it sends a bizarre message to children and it couldn’t be any less Christmassy if it was a bucket of vomit that sing-cries The Greatest Love of All whenever it senses that someone is near. Honestly, you may as well wrap tinsel around a CCTV camera and pass that off as a fun new festive activity.
In summary, I would rather die than live under the harrowing surveillance-state gaze of Elf on the Shelf. Have a lovely Christmas, everyone.
Working out how much someone loves you at Christmas used to be so simple. Was the present expensive? Or did the giver sweat blood to make it?
No more. If, come 25 December, your gift doesn’t arrive branded with your initials, name or grinning face, or with a meaningful haiku, you can forget it – that relationship is as good as dead.
Pork pie with your name on it? Selfie slapped on a bottle of Moët & Chandon? The title of that tortuous first novel you still plan on finishing seared on to one of those Penguin mugs? All these, and more, could be yours.
“The thoughtfulness can show the gift has come from the heart,” says Vita Woods, creative manager at Selfridges, which is wall to wall with concessions offering to customise your goodies. John Lewis is also in on the act, as is Liberty, Debenhams and House of Fraser. Woods thinks personalising presents makes them “special to the individual and for the giver”. After all, nothing says “you’re the one” like a jar of bespoke Nutella that costs double the price of a normal one.
Some items have been personalised for ever. Think of pocket squares, shirt cuffs or pyjamas. It’s a lucrative business. A Louis Vuitton Speedy 30 bag, for example, costs £295 more with a monogram than without. But, thanks to technology and cheap bespoke labels, personalisation has gone mainstream – and it is proving a nice little earner for the shops and brands able to offer it. Vicki Loomes, who studies fads for the agency TrendWatching, thinks “consumers’ experiences on apps that learn purchasing behaviour are driving expectations around personalisation”. She adds: “Manufacturing technologies that allow ever-shorter production times and made-to-order products are allowing the physical world to catch up.”
So, who is to blame for the trend metastasising? Coca-Cola, perhaps, for those Share a Coke bottles in 2013, which reversed falling sales? Or Apple, which offered to personalise iPods (remember those?) in 2007? But the phenomenon goes back further. At the luxury end, accesories designer Anya Hindmarch has let customers add messages to her handbags ever since she started, nearly 30 years ago. She employs a “bespoke craftsman” at each of her flagship stores, in London, Tokyo, New York and Los Angeles.
“I have always loved the Oscar Wilde quote: ‘Be yourself, the other places are taken.’ Our bespoke offering embodies this. You can emboss any handwriting, drawings or naughty messages into the leather to create the product you want. It is the very opposite of seasonal fashion and logos,” says Hindmarch.
If you can’t face the queues for the special in-store services, or miss the cut-off dates to order something online, you could always get hold of an electric engraving pen for as little as a quid and get to work yourself. Possibly the ultimate in personalisation.
This year was largely focused on vandalising your clothes: razoring your jean hems, cropping your tops and, apparently, de-sleeving your shirts. To do this one, you need scissors and good arms. We’re fairly confident this question was made up.
A bleak perennial on the search engine’s annual fashion question roundup but, anyway ... To start, you need remarkable genes. If the year’s catwalk was anything to go by, you also needed curly hair and a decent handle on Instagram.
Thought £2,000 for a dress was expensive? Think again! Haute couture is like catwalk fashion except way, way more expensive, made to order as opposed to ready to wear and as close as fashion gets to art.
In fashion parlance, with a sliver of ankle flesh showing. In normal parlance, just shove them on, mate.
Before Labor Day, but also when you don’t have or want a baby, no longer take public transport, give up coffee and are the Flotus – present or elect.
Sign up to Instagram. Get a handle like “StrongIsSexxxxi41”. Remember that the straw of your green juice is a conduit to an alternative reality where your Lycra sports bra is never three sizes too small and that all burgers are props not sustenance.
Essentially: dressing up like Florence Welch’s cat-lady aunt after a day spent foraging for oyster mushrooms.
Lots of layers. So many layers that people questioned the eyesight, taste and sanity of a generation (see: the entire wardrobe of the Spice Girls).
Repeat (7) but with less awkwardly perched hats and a more laissez-faire attitude to personal hygiene.
The best thing a burgeoning designer can do is put down the mood board, appear on I’m Dancing on Ice in the Big Brother Bake-Off and “drop” a sex tape. Celebrity is the new St Martins (see: the Olsen twins, Kanye West and Beyoncé).
In 2005, Atlanta-based voiceover artist Susan Bennett recorded hundreds of hours of audio for a text-to-speech company. Six years later, on 4 October 2011, she quickly learned that those recordings had been licensed by Apple for the iPhone 4S’s built-in personal assistant, Siri. Overnight, Susan’s voice became globally recognised, whether she liked it or not.
In this week’s episode of Chips with Everything, Matt Shore speaks to Susan about her experiences of being thrust into the world of Siri and how her life has changed since that fateful day.
Brief letters: Fun in your fifties | Another word for hygge | Rugged physiognomy | The Kremlin and Strictly Come Dancing
Age! Oh, you know, between about 18 and 25.
I said, APPEARANCE! Oh, right. Sorry, it’s a bit loud in here. Well, it depends on the bar. Most bar staff dress in an internationally popular style called “cooler than you are”.
Yeah, I’ve always thought that’s odd. I mean, I’m splashing my cash on a night out, they’re earning minimum wage in a low-skilled job, yet I’m the one who feels uncool. Well, fear not. Your days of relative uncoolness may be numbered, my friend.
Have I won a trendy makeover? People often say I would look better if my entire body was obscured by hair and tattoos. I’m sure you would, but no. You’re finally going to feel cooler than some bar staff because some of them are going to be machines.
Eh? The “world’s first” self-service beer pump with contactless card payments began trials this week at Henry’s Cafe & Bar in Piccadilly, central London. It has been designed as an attention-seeking gimmick by Barclaycard, which says it might launch it at festivals and other places where there are often long queues at the bar.
So now we’re letting computers control our beer? That’s right.
Actually, that’s probably quite wise. How does this thing work? Well, you select a drink on the screen, pay with your card, then place your glass under the spout and watch it fill with ale.
What if I don’t want ale? Tough. Lager is too fizzy to dispense reliably. Everything else is complicated in other ways. You get ale.
Will it refuse to serve me if I’m already drunk, as required by law? Oh, um, yeah. I’m sure Barclaycard has installed a pop-up breathalyser or something.
OK. And how does the machine know I’m older than 18? Apart from my dress sense, I mean. Dunno. You have to be 18 to have some bank cards. Or maybe a bored human has to stand next to the pump watching people use it, like at the supermarket.
And will they be cooler than I am? Almost certainly.
Do say: “I have read this ale’s terms and conditions. Cancel/Agree.”
I have never really thought of myself as the sort of cook who makes his own bits and pieces to serve with drinks. Too much fiddle and faff if you ask me. But then when I do, I realise I should have done so all along. Not just because what I’ve made often tastes better than anything I can buy, but because the effort is much more appreciated. Thoughtful drinks and homemade bits like the gin lemonade and bacon popcorn below aren’t a great deal of trouble and say Merry Christmas far more effectively than arranging something you’ve just picked up from the shops on a plate.
With these drinks may I wish you all a happy and peaceful Christmas. See you in a couple of weeks.
Bright as the star in the east, a fresh, citrus-scented gin cocktail.
Makes enough for 4-6 small glasses
unwaxed lemons 2
caster sugar 5 tbsp
still mineral water 500ml
juniper berries 8
ice cubes 
gin (50ml to 250ml of lemonade)
Cut the lemons into large pieces, pips and all peel, and place in a blender jug then add the sugar and water. Process to a thick creamy-yellow liquor, then tip into a jug. Crack the juniper berries lightly using a heavy weight or pestle and mortar. Add to the lemon syrup then refrigerate.
Put ice into the glasses. Pour over the gin and top up with lemonade, and garnish with a slice of lemon.
Bacon fat works brilliantly with the fennel, lending a scent of porcetta.
Lay the bacon or pancetta on a baking sheet and cook under a hot grill until crisp. Turn and cook the other side. You are after truly crisp flesh. Lift the rashers from the tray and place on kitchen paper. Reserve the fat in the tray, tipping it into a deep saucepan.
Melt 95g of the butter in a small pan. While it melts, bash the fennel seed using a pestle and mortar, to release its fragrance, not to crush to a powder, then add to the butter and stir, letting it warm gently. Turn off the heat.
Melt the remaining butter in the bacon fat over a moderate heat, then add the popping corn. Cover tightly with a lid, shaking the pan occasionally, until the kernels have popped. This will take anything between 3 and 5 minutes, depending on the heat and thickness of your pan.
Crumble the bacon or pancetta into tiny pieces, add to the fennel-seed butter with a little sea salt then fold into the popcorn and serve.
Deep ruby red, nicely balanced between sweet and sour, this is a perfect drink for Christmas morning.
Peel the clementines, and break into segments. Remove the skin and pith with your fingers, then lay the segments on a tray and place in the freezer for a couple of hours.
Crack the cardamom pods open with a heavy weight, such as a mortar, but don’t grind them to a powder.
Divide the pomegranate juice between glasses, add two segments of frozen clementines to each glass, then a cardamom pod. Top up with prosecco and serve with ice.
About the size of Danish pastries, these are best warm from the oven.
Makes about 12
green olives 200g (stoned weight 150g)
garlic 2 cloves
basil 10g
parsley leaves 5g
olive oil 120ml
parmesan 60g, grated
puff pastry 500g, ready made
egg a little beaten to glaze
If the olives have stones, remove them. Then put the olive flesh into the bowl of a food processor. Peel the garlic and add the cloves to the olives. Put the basil, leaves and stalks and the parsley leaves into the bowl of the food processor, then process, pouring in the olive oil as you go until you have a loose green paste. Stir in most of the grated parmesan, leaving a little to scatter over the finished pastries.
On a floured work surface, roll out the pastry to a rectangle of about 44 x 30cm. Spread the olive paste over the surface of the pastry leaving a 2cm rim of bare pastry on all sides. Brush the rim with egg wash.
With the narrow edge towards you, roll the pastry up into a long thick sausage, pressing the edges tightly together to seal. Wrap the roll lightly in kitchen paper and refrigerate for 30 minutes. It will firm up a little, making it easier to slice.
Line a baking sheet with baking parchment. Cut the roll into finger- thick slices, placing them flat on the parchment. You will have about 12. Scatter a little of the remaining parmesan over the surface of each and bake for 12-15 minutes or until crisp, golden and puffed.
Using a palette knife, remove the cooked pastries from the baking tray and serve warm.
Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater
Bowie was the first music I really connected with. I’m 19, so wasn’t around when he arrived, but he always felt modern to me – the way he challenged definitions, his confidence, the way he was a figure of self-acceptance for people who don’t feel represented, as well as playing a character.
After my mum texted to tell me that he had died, I got into the shower and cried. I suppose I was crying because it meant I would never get a chance to tell Bowie how important he’d been to us.
Later I saw the reaction unfolding on Twitter, and it became clear that everyone was desperate to talk, to be together, to share his music. So I made a Facebook event, a street party in Brixton, near the mural of his portrait.
In the first hour there were more than 500 responses – eventually that grew to 9,000. I didn’t organise anything really. I just located a space.
At 6pm there were only a couple of us with a guitar and loads of TV cameras. Then the crowds formed. Someone projected the Life on Mars video from their flat on to the wall. There were a lot of tears, but it was much happier than I thought it would be. At one point there were a thousand of us singing “Starman” at the top of our voices.
Gender politics had always been a part of my life, but it was this that made me get involved with the Women’s Equality party and meet people like the Labour MP Stella Creasy, who invited me for a drink at the House of Commons.
I suppose what she saw in me was someone who was staying true to their self, which seems to be the main thrust of what sparked people’s imaginations. I went into a bit of a bunker after it all blew up. I didn’t read any of the press about my awards, or follow it on social media, and to be honest, I’ve forgotten quite a lot about the whole thing, mainly because I’ve been working nonstop, first on a space film called Life, then on The Nutcracker, which of course have been totally different from Mad Max.
If Nutcracker is nominated next year, I won’t wear a fancy gown. I’d look like Widow Twanky. Just like with Mad Max, I’d be paying homage to the film, so possibly there’d be some glitter involved.
I’m still shocked at what an impact it had. I wore trousers – it ended up meaning so much more. I’m interested to see what everybody else wears this year. If it proved one thing, it’s the power of clothes.
Go is seen as an artform in Asia and people have played it for thousands of years: they consider that it embodies the mysteries of the universe in some way. So we knew the DeepMind Go match was going to be quite a big event in South Korea, but we didn’t realise the whole country would come to a standstill watching it.
We’d spent two years developing the AlphaGo artificial intelligence programme. Go is so complex – with more possible positions than atoms in the universe – that you need something akin to human intuition to win. The challenge was to mimic aspects of human intuition, like subconscious pattern matching.
We knew AlphaGo had advantages and disadvantages. It can’t read Go books or learn from other people – it has to build its own knowledge.
So before the match with grandmaster Lee Sedol, we didn’t know how well it was going to do. AlphaGo had played against itself a million times, but we weren’t sure if it would be weak against a human player who could be more creative.
The evening before the match they were predicting a 5-0 loss: the consensus until then was that it would take another 10-20 years to develop a programme to beat a world champion. But it was how AlphaGo won that was amazing, with astounding moves that were so creative. Since that game, the top players all want to play against it. Sedol told me afterwards it was the most amazing experience of his life.
When I saw that big English boy coming towards us with his mobile, happily shouting: “I’ve got a picture with the hijacker!” I couldn’t resist saying: “You are an idiot, man.” I wish I’d slapped him. What if he really had a bomb? I fly often, but I’m not relaxed any more. Now I constantly look around. For the first two months I didn’t manage to get back to work.
The hijacker was the man sitting in the aircraft tail, on the hostess seat, appearing and disappearing behind the curtains. In Cyprus, he released everyone apart from the staff and us, the five westerners. It scared me so badly. “Here we go,” I thought. We were gathered in the tail. I thought: I hope the commander managed to empty the fuel tanks, the hijacker might have explosives on him.
Then I thought, if I lower myself in the seat, it will help take the worst of the explosion. Meanwhile the English boy, Benjamin, goes to the bathroom and returns with that picture. I was so angry. As well as thinking it was absurd. I heard him saying on television that he got the picture to ascertain whether the belt was really explosive. Which is plainly not true. He smiled like a kid.
I was not laughing. I was on the phone with my wife, telling her, “If anything happens to me, give my bike to a friend and ask him to scatter my ashes at full speed.”
Leicester got rid of manager Nigel Pearson and put Claudio Ranieri in charge and that made me think they could do really well. They had a manager with so much experience, anything could happen.
The odds against winning the premier league were 5,000/1, which was very appealing. And stranger things have happened. I was camping in the middle of a field in Cornwall with my fiancée and I downloaded the William Hill app and put £1 on. It helped that I’d had a few drinks. Then I thought, if this actually happens I’ll be fuming at the end of the season – so I put £5 on them to win before they’d even kicked a ball.
It was just banter all the way up to Christmas and then it started to sink in. I’m really not a nervous person, but towards the end of the season it was quite unbearable. It took over my life. What had been a laugh and a joke got more tense with each game.
Just before the end of the season, they played Manchester United. I was on a stag weekend in Tallinn. I was actually sick that day through nerves – that’s how bad it got. I came back and Chelsea beat Spurs and that was it, Leicester had won.
It was the weirdest feeling. 